Semiconductor-based electron ﬂying qubits: Review on
recent progress accelerated by numerical modelling

Hermann Edlbauer1, Junliang Wang1, Thierry Crozes1, Pierre Perrier1, Seddik Ouacel1, Cl´ement Geﬀroy1, Giorgos

Georgiou1,2,3, Eleni Chatzikyriakou4, Antonio Lacerda-Santos4, Xavier Waintal4, D. Christian Glattli5, Preden

Roulleau5, Jayshankar Nath5, Masaya Kataoka6, Janine Splettstoesser7, Matteo Acciai7, Maria Cecilia da Silva
Figueira8, Kemal ¨Oztas8, Alex Trellakis8, Thomas Grange9, Oleg M. Yevtushenko8, Stefan Birner8∗ &

Christopher B¨auerle1∗

1 Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, Institut N´eel, 38000 Grenoble, France
2 Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CEA, Leti, 38000 Grenoble, France
3 James Watt School of Engineering, Electronics and Nanoscale Engineering, University of Glasgow, University Avenue,

Glasgow G12 8QQ, United Kingdom

4 PHELIQS, Universit´e Grenoble Alpes, CEA, Grenoble INP, IRIG, Grenoble 38000, France
5 SPEC, Universit´e Paris-Saclay, CEA, CNRS, Gif sur Yvette 91191, France
6 National Physical Laboratory, Hampton Road, Teddington, Middlesex TW11 0LW, United Kingdom
7 Department of Microtechnology and Nanoscience (MC2), Chalmers University of Technology, G¨oteborg, S-412 96,

Sweden

8 nextnano GmbH, Konrad-Zuse-Platz 8, 81829 M¨unchen, Germany
9 nextnano Lab, 12 chemin des prunelles, 38700 Corenc, France
∗ corresponding author: stefan.birner@nextnano.com; christopher.bauerle@neel.cnrs.fr

Abstract

The progress of charge manipulation in semiconductor-based nanoscale devices opened up a novel route to

realise a ﬂying qubit with a single electron. In the present review, we introduce the concept of these electron

ﬂying qubits, discuss their most promising realisations and show how numerical simulations are applicable to

accelerate experimental development cycles. Addressing the technological challenges of ﬂying qubits that are

currently faced by academia and quantum enterprises, we underline the relevance of interdisciplinary cooperation

to move emerging quantum industry forward. The review consists of two main sections:

Pathways towards the electron ﬂying qubit: We address three routes of single-electron transport in

GaAs-based devices focusing on surface acoustic waves, hot-electron emission from quantum dot pumps and

Levitons. For each approach, we discuss latest experimental results and point out how numerical simulations

facilitate engineering the electron ﬂying qubit.

Numerical modelling of quantum devices: We review the full stack of numerical simulations needed

for fabrication of the ﬂying qubits. Choosing appropriate models, examples of basic quantum mechanical

simulations are explained in detail. We discuss applications of open-source (KWANT) and the commercial

(nextnano) platforms for modelling the ﬂying qubits. The discussion points out the large relevance of software

tools to design quantum devices tailored for eﬃcient operation.

2
2
0
2

l
u
J

4

]
l
l
a
h
-
s
e
m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[

1
v
8
1
3
1
0
.
7
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
1 Introduction

Flying qubits are originally intended to serve as a communication link within a quantum computer 1 and

represent a vital part of global road-maps towards secure data transmission – the so-called quantum internet 2.

Recently, in-ﬂight manipulations of photon-number states (so-called Fock states) have shown that the ﬂying

qubit architecture can also be applied as a stand-alone quantum processing unit 3. Owing to this progress on

photonic quantum-computation approaches 4,5, ﬂying qubits are typically associated with photons 6. Employing

so-called “time multiplexing” architectures, photonic quantum computing can in principle scale up to millions

of qubits. The strongly probabilistic nature of photonic two-qubit gates renders the far-reaching photonic

coherence however a double-edged sword making the realisation of photonic quantum computing challenging.

Though, a ﬂying-qubit architecture can also be built on the basis of other quantum systems such as the electron 7.

The charge of an electron causes Coulomb interaction with its electro-magnetic environment, which exposes its

quantum properties to decoherence but enables well-controlled single-particle manipulations and multi-qubit

coupling.

Historically, ﬂying qubits stem from the research ﬁeld of quantum optics which addresses – in opposition to

wave optics – the granular nature of light. The need to control the ultimate grain of light – a single photon – led

to the advent of the ﬁrst single-photon source in 1974 8 and over several decades, various promising approaches

have been developed 9. A prominent example are deterministic single-photon sources based on quantum dots

(QD) 10,11. Since these photon emitters allow for eﬃcient coupling to a nanophotonic cavity 12,13 and provide

a high degree of indistinguishability 14,15 and brightness 16–18, they turned out as highly suitable sources for

quantum communication 6. Yet, the extraction eﬃciencies of quantum dot based single-photon sources are

not at the level to perform photonic quantum computing. Nevertheless, the demand for photonic components

such as on-demand single-photon sources, quantum photonic processors and single-photon detectors fostered

the emergence of start-ups such as Quandela 1, QuiX 2, or SingleQuantum 3, to name a few. Photonic quantum

computing is currently pursued by the start-up PsiQuantum 4 which uses heralded photons. Here parametric

down conversion is used to create from a non-deterministic single photon source a pair of photons serving as

signal and idler. Measuring the idler photon with an additional single-photon detector ensures that indeed a

single photon (signal) has been generated – however, at the expense of additional hardware.

In order to implement photonic quantum computation, two-qubit gates are a necessity. As photons do not

interact, operating two-qubit gates on physical qubits is very diﬃcult. It is possible in theory to use non-linear

eﬀects such as Kerr eﬀects, but these eﬀects are so small that it is not possible in practice, at least in known

media 5. Another route is to use photon detectors and the associated projective measurement as a way to

entangle photons. While photon detectors can indeed produce entanglement they do so in a probabilistic way,

i.e. depending on the result of the measurement, the remaining state will be entangled or not. However, such

probabilistic gates cannot be used on a large quantum computer as the probability for the correct circuit to

be applied will decay exponentially with the number of two-qubit gates. Protocols have been proposed (such

as the Knill–Laﬂamme–Milburn protocol) 4 trying to mitigate this issue and to enhance the probability for the

correct gate to be applied. This approach comes however along with signiﬁcant cost since many (n (cid:29) 1) ancilla

1https://quandela.com
2https://www.quix.nl
3https://singlequantum.com
4https://psiquantum.com

2

photonic qubits are required to guarantee that the correct gate is applied (with an error probability of the order

of 1/n) 5. From this point of view, the development of non-photonic approaches represents a promising and

competitive avenue.

For sake of completeness, let us also point out a diﬀerent approach to photonic quantum computing based on

so-called squeezed states. Here the qubits are generated as a superposition of multiple photons in a light pulse.

This approach is pursued by the start-up Xanadu 5. It has conceptual similarity to the Leviton single-electron

transport which will be presented below in section 2.3.

As for photons, electron quantum optics started by probing the discrete nature of the electrons. The

granularity of electrons was undermined by the quantum ﬂuctuations of the current 19 – the so-called shot noise –

similar to photon noise 20,21. The ﬁrst experiments mimicking textbook experiments of quantum optics, but with

electrons, date back to 1999 with electronic Hanbury Brown and Twiss experiments 22–24. These achievements

were succeeded by the realisation of the ﬁrst electronic Mach–Zehnder interferometer 25, a quantum device that

nicely shows up the wave nature of the electron and which is a key tool for qubit manipulation. All of these

pioneering experiments that fostered the idea of electronic quantum control for computing applications have

however been performed applying a DC current – meaning a continuous stream of billions of electrons. Only

in 2007 the invention of the ﬁrst single-electron sources 26 opened up the possibility of performing electron-

quantum-optics experiments at the single-particle level. This achievement triggered tremendous progress on

electron quantum optics over the last two decades bringing various single-electron sources 26–30 that reach now

emission eﬃciencies larger than 99% 30–34 – a value far superior to latest single-photon sources 11,16,18,35,36.

Besides emission, also single-electron detection has signiﬁcantly progressed. Whenever a single electron is

captured on a suﬃciently long timescale – of the order of a microsecond or more – also detection eﬃciencies

well above 99% are achieved 31,32. The eﬃcient control on the single-particle level points out the large potential

to exploit single ﬂying electrons for quantum applications.

From measurements on charge qubits in stationary double quantum dots 37–40, the coherence time of electron

ﬂying qubits is expected to be of the order of a few nanoseconds. Decoherence is, thus, the major obstacle for

quantum implementations with single ﬂying electrons. The young research ﬁeld of electron quantum optics

is however constantly producing new ﬁndings bringing the coherence properties of ﬂying electrons closer to

macroscopic scales 41–44. From the quantum-computation perspective, the central ﬁgure of merit is the number

of operations that can be performed within the coherence time. At present, this number is about 1000 for

leading approaches such as superconducting qubits, trapped ions, or spin qubits 45–49. In order to achieve such

operation ﬁdelity with electron ﬂying qubits, a time control at the picosecond scale is required. Such ultrafast

in-ﬂight manipulation is presently being pursued in the FET-Open project UltraFastNano 50.

The EU project UltraFastNano6 aims to advance ultrafast operations in nanoelectronic devices to demon-

strate the ﬁrst electron ﬂying qubit. The concept is similar to that of a photonic quantum computer but, instead

of photons, electrons are used as carrier of quantum information. The project is a concrete example where the

academic and the industrial sector are joining forces to develop and benchmark the tools that are required

by the value chain of emerging quantum industry. Often, the initial market of tools for suﬃciently advanced

technologies is too small to be pursued by larger corporations, opening a niche-market opportunity for small

5https://www.xanadu.ai
6www.ultrafastnano.eu – https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/862683

3

and medium-sized enterprises (SME). This demand is satisﬁed by the industrial partner nextnano GmbH 7 –

an SME based in Munich (Germany) with 12 employees and 300 customers in more than 35 countries – which

develops a software tool calculating the quantum mechanical properties of semiconductor nanodevices. The

synergy of academic and industrial partners on numeric simulations and experimental implementations within

UltraFastNano fosters progress on electron ﬂying qubits opening a novel branch of quantum industry.

In this article, we review three promising experimental routes towards electron-ﬂying-qubit implementa-

tions and discuss the potential of numerical simulations to speed up experimental development cycles towards

quantum-computing applications. The reviewed experimental pathways diﬀer mainly in the way the electron

qubit is transported. In particular, we address single-electron transport by means of a surface-acoustic wave,

emission form a quantum-dot pump and Levitons. For each transport approach, we point out the speciﬁc as-

pects where numerical simulations are key to unveil eﬃcient routes for follow-up implementations. Identifying

these target aspects of cutting-edge electron-quantum-optics experiments, we ﬁnally present generic numerical

simulations providing insights that are decisive for the development stages towards electron ﬂying qubits. Con-

fronting numerical simulations with latest experimental results, we point out the capability of the numerical

simulations to guide experimental implementations faster to success.

2 Pathways towards the electron ﬂying qubit

Diﬀerent than for a classical bit where the states 0 and 1 basically correspond to the charging state of a

capacitor, the electron ﬂying qubit is deﬁned via the presence of a single electron in two paths of transportation.

The quantum state of the thus-deﬁned ﬂying qubit can be depicted on a Bloch sphere as shown in Fig. 1a. The

north and south pole of the sphere represent the classical states of the electron being in one of the two paths of

transportation (0 and 1). The probability to end up in one of these states is represented via angular coordinates

of the sphere θ and φ that make up the quantum state ψ:

|ψ(cid:105) ∝ cos

(cid:19)

(cid:18) θ
2

|0(cid:105) + sin

(cid:19)

(cid:18) θ
2

· exp (iφ) |1(cid:105)

(1)

The thus-deﬁned quantum state of the ﬂying electron is fully controllable in an electronic Mach–Zehnder

interferometry setup as sketched in Fig. 1b. The quantum interferometer hosts two regions where the paths of

transportation approach each-other and couple via a narrow potential barrier (see horizontal lines). According

to the potential landscape within this coupling-region – see Fig. 1c –, the ﬂying qubit state undergoes periodic

oscillations (angle θ) caused by coherent tunneling. In between the two tunnel-coupled regions, the ﬂying qubit

picks-up a quantum phase φ that is tunable via the potential along the two paths and the enclosed magnetic ﬂux.

Employing a surface-gate deﬁned quantum interferometer realised in a GaAs-based heterostructure (see Fig. 1d),

basic quantum operations of such an electronic ﬂying qubit have already been successfully demonstrated (see

Fig. 1e) with a continuous current of electrons 42. The big challenge ahead is to perform such quantum state

control on the level of single electrons and to couple several of the so-obtained electron ﬂying qubits to generate

a set of non-local entangled quantum states.

In semiconductor devices, a single electron is manipulable in a surface-gate-deﬁned nanoscale structure

such as a quantum dot or a waveguide. The majority of such implementations are performed within the

two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) formed near the surface of a GaAs-based heterostructure 7, which have

7www.nextnano.com

4

typically coherence lengths of several tens of micrometers 41,42,51,52. Applying a set of negative voltages on these

gates, one can shape the potential landscape in the 2DEG and thus form and control the nanoscale devices. So

far, there are two methods to guide the electrons along the desired paths: electrostatic waveguides 42,53 or – at

high magnetic ﬁeld – quantum-Hall edge states 25,54. The 2DEG quality has been continuously improved 55,56

and combined with clever device design 41, which allowed to push the phase coherence length up to several

hundreds of micrometers in recent experiments 43.

The availability of quantum dots serving as highly eﬃcient single-electron sources and receivers led to

the development of single-electron-transport techniques based on surface acoustic waves 28,29,57 and voltage-

modulation pumping 58,59. Fostered by technological progress and a growing understanding of the underlying

physical mechanisms 60, these approaches now achieve transfer eﬃciencies well above 99% 31–34. The quantum-

dot-based transport systems represent the electronic counterpart to the deterministic single-photon source we

have mentioned earlier. Besides that, diﬀerent avenues have been explored such as the so-called Leviton that is a

well-protected collective single-electron excitation generated by an ultrafast Lorentzian voltage pulse 30,61,62. As

the aforementioned photonic squeezed state that is a special kind of a coherent laser pulse, a Leviton represents

a special form of a classical voltage pulse. The progress in these experimental routes – surface acoustic waves,

electron pumps and Levitons – opened up the way to realise a ﬂying-qubit platform with electrons instead

of photons.

In the following sections, we outline these three conceptually diﬀerent approaches towards the

electron ﬂying qubit in more detail and discuss how numerical simulations have played a key role to interpret

the experimental results guiding nanodevice design to the next generation.

2.1 Electron qubits surﬁng on a sound wave

In III-V semiconductor compounds, such as the presently discussed GaAs-based devices, sound is accompa-

nied by an electric potential wave due to its piezoelectric properties allowing charge displacement 63. At the ﬁrst

glance, acousto-electric transport seems a rather brute approach to move an electron qubit. A surface acoustic

wave (SAW) has proven itself however as an eﬃcient and well-controllable transport medium. Fig. 2a shows a

schematic of the single-electron transport approach. A SAW is typically generated with an interdigital trans-

ducer (IDT) – a device that is well established in modern consumer electronics products 64. Applying a ﬁnite,

resonant input signal on the IDT, a SAW is emitted which then travels relatively slowly with a characteristic

speed of about 3 µm ns−1 towards a surface-gate-deﬁned nanoscale device 65. The circuit is constructed on the

basis of fully depleted transport channels whose ends are equipped with quantum dots (QD) – see Fig. 2b –

serving as highly eﬃcient single-electron source and receiver. Each QD is equipped with an adjacent quantum

point contact (QPC) allowing to trace its charge occupation. After loading a single electron at the source QD

via a sequence of voltage variations on the corresponding surface gates, a SAW is emitted. The SAW train

typically has a duration of tens of nanoseconds and wavelength of 1 µm. When arriving at the depleted trans-

port channel, the potential modulation of the SAW forms a train of moving quantum dots propagating through

the surface-gate-deﬁned rail. After loading an electron at the source QD, this SAW train allows to shuttle the

electron through the quantum rail to a distant receiver QD 28,29.

The robustness of a SAW train enables acousto-electric transfer of a single electron in a nanoscale circuit

approaching macroscopic dimensions. An experimental investigation of a 22-µm-long SAW-driven single-electron

circuit consisting of two tunnel-coupled channels – see single-electron circuit in Fig. 2a – achieved single-shot

5

transfer eﬃciencies larger than 99% 31. Here, the exact sending position within the SAW train is controlled via

the delay of a picosecond-scale voltage-pulse trigger applied on the source QD. Adjusting the potential landscape

in the tunnel-coupled wire (TCW), it is possible to partition the electron wave function via directional coupling

at will between the two transport channels. Fig. 2c shows an exemplary measurement of the single-shot transfer

probability P as function of potential detuning ∆ in the TCW. The partitioning data shows a constantly high

transfer eﬃciency despite the detuning ∆ of the TCW potential. The shape of the partitioning data bears

important information on the time-evolution of the ﬂying quantum state that is of central importance for

quantum applications.

To draw the right conclusions from the single-shot partitioning data, numerical simulations are essential. In

the presently discussed example, time-dependent simulations of the electron’s propagation through the TCW

region, revealed charge excitation – as schematically shown via the potential landscapes shown in Fig. 2d – due

to insuﬃcient SAW conﬁnement. In these calculations, the stationary potential is calculated with the nextnano

software based on the true sample geometry and the electric properties of the heterostructure. Superposing this

potential landscape with the dynamic modulation of the SAW, one can prepare an electron in its ground state

and simulate its propagation through the device as shown in Fig. 2e. Setting a SAW-modulation as present in

the experiment (A ≈ 17 meV), the simulation shows a picture that is in good agreement with the experimental

observation: As the electron enters the TCW, insuﬃcient conﬁnement within the moving, acousto-electric QD

provokes charge excitation that prevents the appearance of tunnel oscillations. Instead, the probability to ﬁnd

the electron spreads according to the excitation spectrum. Unlike the experiment, numerical simulations allow

to examine the eﬀect of various device parameters in a systematic and fast way. For the presently discussed

example, the time-dependent simulations particularly showed up the importance of the acousto-electric in-

ﬂight conﬁnement. Augmenting the SAW amplitude by a factor of three (A ≈ 45 meV), the time-dependent

simulations predict preservation of quantum conﬁnement at TCW transit resulting in tunnel oscillations 31.

Since an increase of the acousto-electric power of this scale is technically feasible, the time-dependent quantum

simulation points out a central, easily addressable aspect in the realisation of electron ﬂying qubits transported

by sound.

Following the numerically guided pathway of augmented acousto-electric amplitude, we anticipate coherent

in-ﬂight manipulations of ﬂying charge qubits on technically relevant length scales soon in single-shot exper-

iments. For a ﬂying qubit employing the electron’s charge, ﬁrst observations of tunnel-related probability

oscillations have been already reported from experimental studies on SAW-driven transport of a continuous

stream of single electrons 66,67. In congruency with the prediction of the aforementioned time-dependent sim-

ulations, the threshold of the SAW amplitude to signiﬁcantly conﬁne an electron in a single acousto-electric

minimum was recently determined as A = (24 ± 3) meV in ﬂight-time measurements 68. For electron ﬂying

qubits deﬁned by spin, increased SAW amplitude have already helped to demonstrate coherent transport of an

entangled electron pair over 6 µm distance 69. The coherent acousto-electric transfer of a single electron between

remote quantum dots marks a new route to link quantum information in semiconductor qubit circuits where

numerical simulations will certainly play a central role to identify key aspects and speed up experimental cycles.

6

2.2 Hot-ballistic electrons

On the contrary to the aforementioned acousto-electric transport approach, a lithographically-deﬁned, but

highly-tunable, quantum dot can also be employed to emit a single electron at high energy. These hot-electron

sources for the controlled emission of single and multiple particles are of high interest from the perspective of

higher-temperature operation and isolation from environment. In these devices, electrons can be emitted at

an energy ∼ 100 meV above the Fermi energy, hence the cooling of the Fermi sea at millikelvin temperatures

may not be necessary. Besides, hot electrons can be transmitted through a depleted channel, eliminating

undesirable interactions with the Fermi sea. For the controlled emission of single and multiple particles, hot-

electron sources are driven by strong potential modulation determining the timing of electron emission via slow,

stochastic tunneling through a barrier. This process has a potential advantage of a high purity, meaning that

the energy and time window into which the particles (or wave packets) are emitted ﬂuctuates little between

successive emissions. On the other hand, due to a large phase space available, the inelastic scattering rate

during propagation can be high, leading to short decoherence time.

This is in contrast to the electrons conﬁned in SAW potential or the Levitons, for which the electrostatic

conﬁnement or the limitation in available states (by the ﬁlled Fermi sea), respectively, protect the states from

scattering processes. The nature of inelastic processes for hot electrons injected in GaAs/AlGaAs heterostruc-

tures has been investigated in Ref. 70–76. At zero or small magnetic ﬁelds, the dominant scattering process is

electron–electron interactions by the Fermi sea. For low-energy electrons (a few tens of meV above the Fermi

energy), the electron–electron interactions continue to be the dominant process at higher magnetic ﬁelds applied

in perpendicular to the plane of two-dimensional electron gas. For high-energy electrons (∼ 100 meV above the

Fermi energy), the magnetic conﬁnement to the channel edge limits the spatial overlap with the Fermi sea and

consequently suppresses electron–electron interactions. Instead, the emission of longitudinal optical phonons 77

becomes the dominant process. Generally, the optical-phonon emission rate at high magnetic ﬁelds tends to be

smaller than the electron–electron scattering rate at low magnetic ﬁelds, and therefore the ballistic transport

length tends to be larger at higher magnetic ﬁelds. The suppression of backscattering processes due to chiral

transport also contributes to a longer transport length at higher ﬁelds.

The technology to use hot electrons for electron quantum optics experiments is relatively new and not much

information has been gathered regarding their suitability for applications in quantum information processing.

In order to explore the potential to use these hot-electron sources for the preparation of ﬂying qubits, it is

important to gain very precise knowledge of the relevant properties of the injected particles. These are (i)

the time- and energy interval into which particles are emitted (ii) the purity of the wave packets, namely the

precision in the time- and energy-interval in which the particle is detected in every driving cycle. At the same

time it is crucial to analyse, (iii) how these properties are aﬀected during the propagation of wave packets along

depleted channels and to minimise a possible deterioration of the signal. These aspects hence need to be tested

and control over them has to be obtained.

The detection of hot-ballistic electrons emitted by a single-electron source was made using a scheme shown

in Fig. 3 72. The energy distribution of hot electrons was obtained from the transmitted current through a

detector barrier. In addition to the main distribution around the emission energy, replica of the distribution

with discrete energy steps ∼ 36 meV were experimentally observed. They were attributed to the emission of

longitudinal-optical phonons. Further studies on phonon interactions 73,74 led to a method to suppress phonon

7

emission probabilities by softening the edge potential 75,78. This technique was used to extend the phonon

scattering length to as much as ∼ 1 mm. Using the long ballistic length, time-of-ﬂight measurements were

performed to extract the electron drift velocity ranging from 30 to 130 µm ns−1 79.

The time-of-ﬂight measurements used a time-gating technique to measure the electron arrival-time distri-

bution 80. This was later developed into a tomographic measurement of quasi-probability distribution in the

energy-time phase space by controlling the ramp speed of gate voltage 81–83. This measurement revealed an

energy-time correlation of the distribution imprinted by the ramp speed of source energy state during the emis-

sion process (see Fig. 4) 82. The projection of this distribution onto the time or energy axis gives the arrival-time

or energy distribution of the emitted states. The purity of the observed distribution was only 0.04, and therefore

the observed state is likely to be a mixed state. We note that the time and energy resolutions of the experiment
in Ref. 82 were estimated to be σt (cid:39) 0.3 ps and σE (cid:39) 0.8 meV, giving σtσE (cid:39) 0.36(cid:126), implying that this method
is capable of resolving the minimum uncertainty limit ((cid:126)/2). Therefore the observed low purity is not due to

poor measurement resolutions, but is likely due to noises in electron emission process from the source. In this

set of experiment, the smallest arrival-time distribution observed was σt,min (cid:39) 5 ps, and the smallest product

of time and energy widths was ∼ 30 times larger than the minimum uncertainty limit (taking into account the

energy-time correlation). A method has been proposed in Ref. 84 to emit each electron into Gaussian-shaped

minimum uncertainty states. Another important experimental technique is the full counting statistics of the

electron number partitioned by a beam splitter (a tunnel barrier). This has been demonstrated using noise

measurements 85 or a trap coupled to a single-charge detector 32,86.

The time scale of electron emission directly reﬂects in the width of the emitted wave packets. In quantum

optics experiments with electrons, this time scale is important for the visibility of interference eﬀects. In or-

der to obtain these insights, the times at which single or multiple particles are emitted from the hot-electron

sources can be studied analytically or numerically taking into account the time-dependent modulation of the

single-particle energy levels, as well as of the shape of the tunneling barrier between quantum dot and conduc-

tor 80. Importantly, theoretical studies have recently shown that Coulomb interaction between electrons on the

dynamically driven quantum dot have a strong impact on the energies at which the particles are emitted. Most

crucially this impact on the electron energies also directly inﬂuences the time scale on which the emission of the

diﬀerent particles takes place 87. This theory furthermore predicts that the separation of time scales becomes

particularly relevant for energy-dependent barriers 88. Diﬀerent schemes of how to read out these diﬀerent rel-

evant emission time scales using side-coupled detector dots 89 or nonadiabatic pumping schemes 90 have been

suggested. This last scheme in particular also addresses relaxation times due to phonons during the emission

process.

Based on the work described above, one can expect that realisations of Mach–Zehnder experiments will

become possible with these types of sources, as suggested in Ref. 91,92, similar to previous proposals for single- and

two-particle interferometers for minimal-excitation single-particle sources 93–95. Ref. 92 studied phase-averaging

eﬀects, which are particularly important for the temporally-short, high-energy single-electron wave packets.

As a result it becomes necessary to tune asymmetric interference arm lengths and delay time, which could

be achieved by tuning the drift velocity. These analytical studies 91–95 assume an emission of pure states and

ideal beam splitters, which are over-simpliﬁed compared to a realistic experiment. Hence, in order to improve

the device characteristics, more realistic numerical modelling of these aspects could be a helpful complement.

While the electron coherence of hot electrons is yet to be demonstrated, the short length of electron wave packet

8

in time domain and the ability to control their emission timing with a picosecond resolution can be useful in

ultrafast electronics applications. In-situ voltage sampling under cryogenic environment has been demonstrated

with a bandwidth potentially exceeding 100 GHz 96. This technique was used to determine the precise gate

voltage ramp proﬁle for quantum tomography measurements 82.

2.3 Leviton qubits ﬂying over the Fermi sea

A conceptually diﬀerent approach to realise an electron ﬂying qubit is to generate a single-electron wave

packet directly from the Fermi sea. This approach seems counterintuitive as a perturbation of the Fermi sea

excites both electrons and holes and does in principle not allow the generation of a pure single-electron wave

packet. L. S. Levitov and co-workers came up with an original idea to form a collective electron excitation ﬂying

over the Fermi sea without leaving a hole 97–99. It has been shown that a voltage pulse of Lorentzian shape:

V (t) =

V0
π

τ /2
t2 + (τ /2)2

(2)

generates a pure single-electron excitation – the so-called Leviton – if the amplitude V0 and the full-width at

half-maximum τ are chosen to match the quantization condition:

(cid:90) ∞

−∞

eV (t) dt = h

(3)

where e is the elementary charge and h is Planck’s constant. A Lorentzian pulse fulﬁlling this quantization

condition is shown in Fig. 5a. Fig. 5b shows the corresponding excitation spectrum – meaning the occupation of

states above and below the Fermi energy. The calculation shows a distribution that is characteristic for Leviton

excitation. The collective wave function is only occupying the states right above the Fermi level (zero energy)

forming a pure electronic excitation that is robust against relaxation.

It took almost 20 years until the theoretical concept of a Leviton was demonstrated in experiment 30. The

reason for this long delay was mainly related to the diﬃculty in generating clean and suﬃciently short voltage

pulses of Lorentzian shape that are injected directly via an Ohmic contact of the quantum device. Compared

to the aforementioned quantum-dot-based sources, the Leviton approach brings the advantage that nanolithog-

raphy techniques are not required to deﬁne single-electron emitters. At last, progress in microwave engineering

has bridged this gap and allowed one to verify this original concept. The experiment demonstrated minimiza-

tion of shot noise due to the absence of holes via Leviton formation and Hong–Ou–Mandel type experiments

with very high degree of indistinguishability. To study the wave function of such ﬂying charge excitation 99–106,

quantum tomography protocols have been developed allowing a measurement of the Wigner distribution func-

tion 61,62,107,108. In addition, time-resolved experiments have shown propagation of Leviton-like ﬂying charges

over distances of more than 80 µm without measurable dispersion 53. Owing to the occupation of states right

above the Fermi sea, Levitons are expected to have extremely good coherence properties 109–112 compared to

other injection schemes 113–115 making them highly promising candidates for electron-ﬂying-qubit implementa-

tions.

The next important step to benchmark these beneﬁts is the implementation of a quantum interferometer

with Levitons. Since Levitons are simply injected via voltage pulses on an ohmic contact, the geometry of such

a single-qubit device is very similar to that of early experiments 42. Figure 5c shows a SEM image of a possible

implementation with schematic indications of the interferometer paths. The propagation velocity of the injected

Leviton pulse is expected to be on the order of 100 µm ns−1 53. Since the dynamics of such propagating pulses

9

within a quantum interferometer have not been investigated yet, it is important to have experimental control

of the pulse width to ﬁt the ﬂying charge excitation within the tunnel-coupling regions (≈ 2 µm) requiring

pulses with full-width-at-half-maximum smaller than 20 ps. The generation of such pulses with cutting-edge

microwave synthesis approaches is possible but at the technical limit. A promising alternative route allowing

pulses with widths of 1 ps or smaller is the optoelectronic generation via ultrafast photo switches 116–120. Besides

a proper Leviton source, it is of utmost importance to design a quantum interferometer structure allowing for

qubit manipulation with maximum eﬃciency. For this purpose, numerical simulations serve as a useful tool to

model the evolution of quantum states along the interferometer structure. In order to deduce the coherence

length of a certain implementation it is necessary to measure the strength of the quantum oscillations for devices

with successively increasing island-length. The knowledge on these aspects of a single electron ﬂying qubit made

up by Levitons will be decisive for the applicability in quantum-computing implementations.

One route to realise ﬂying qubits based on Levitons employs electronic waveguides deﬁned by surface gates

in the two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) of a GaAs/GaAlAs heterostructure 42,53. An alternative platform is

transport along quantum Hall edge channels 25,41. It is formed when a 2DEG is placed in a very large magnetic

ﬁeld. In this regime the bulk becomes insulating and the only quantum channels carrying the current occur

on the sample edge. It is applicable in the aforementioned GaAs framework or lightly doped graphene. The

implementation of quantum point contacts (QPCs) enables the realisation of an electronic beam-splitter. By

combining two QPCs, an electronic Mach–Zehnder interferometer is realised 25,121 allowing full qubit manipu-

lation on the Bloch sphere. Being chiral, the propagation along quantum edge channels oﬀers a very long mean

free path and coherent transport 43. In this regime, all the electron quantum optics tools are realizable such as

Hanbury-Brown–Twiss 122 and Hong–Ou–Mandel interferometry 54. Single electron sources based on Levitons

have been also implemented, particularly in graphene 123,124. Compared to quantum wires based on electronic

waveguides at low magnetic ﬁeld, the advantage is a nearly perfect free propagation of electrons, thanks to the

chiral nature of the edge channels (electrons cannot go back after scattering on impurities). The drawback is

the use of few Tesla magnetic ﬁelds and the chiral nature of the propagation which makes coupling of more

than two electron ﬂying qubits challenging.

Single-shot detection represents a major task to realise an electron ﬂying qubit with Levitons. For the afore-

mentioned investigation of quantum oscillations, statistical measurements are suﬃcient.

In order to control

single Leviton qubits individually, it will be however necessary to detect the presence for each ﬂying electron

via capacitive coupling to an ultra-sensitive quantum detector. One possible implementation of such a quantum

detector is a spin qubit that is operated in a regime where it is extremely sensitive to charge ﬂuctuations 125.

At present, this type of detector is capable of sensing a few electrons and enables a quantum non-demolition

measurement 126. The quantum detector is able to record the presence of a passing ﬂying electron without

perturbing its quantum state that can in turn be reused after detection for further quantum manipulations.

This aspect is an important advantage over single-photon detectors where the photon disappears after detec-

tion. Another possible implementation that has been put forward recently guides the ﬂying electron through

a meander structure which is capacitively coupled to two large metal electrodes. The passage of the ﬂying

electron beneath the two surface electrodes generates an oscillating voltage signal. This detector is expected to

have a sub-electron sensitivity 127 and, when properly integrated into a quantum circuit, can also be adapted

for quantum non-demolition measurements.

Another aspect of major importance is the scalablilty of surface-gate deﬁned quantum-interferometer devices.

10

Fig. 6 shows a SEM image of a prototype multi-qubit implementation hosting four quantum interferometers.

Simultaneous operation of the electron ﬂying qubits is accomplished via an extended bridge cross-connecting

island-gate of each device. To implement a two-qubit gate in such a setup the Coulomb interaction of ﬂying

electrons is exploited. Let us consider the case where two Levitons are simultaneously sent through a pair of

neighboring quantum interferometers. By adjusting the potential barrier of a Coulomb-coupling gate (C) – as

shown in Fig. 6 – the ﬂying electrons are exposed to their respective Coulomb potential which introduces a

quantum phase φ causing entanglement. The phase induced by each of the two electrons is proportional to

the coupling constant and the interaction time, hence to the gate length. The Coulomb-coupling strength can

be adjusted by changing the gate voltage on the electrostatic gates deﬁning the phase-exchange window. The

coupling region can be as short a 1 µm for the case of ballistic electrons 128,129 and much shorter for the case

of SAW-transported electrons since the propagation speed is 100 times smaller. If a π phase shift is induced,

the probability of detecting an electron in the output port |0(cid:105) or |1(cid:105) is inverted, hence realising a controlled

phase gate Cφ. Combining this experimental setup with 2 interferometers one can even go one step further

and test Bell’s inequalities as proposed in reference 7,130. In this case, all of the four beam splitters are used

and a π phase shift is induced with the Coulomb coupler enabling the formation of a maximally entangled Bell

state. The scalablilty of electron-ﬂying-qubit implementations is very similar to that of photonic circuits where

multiple Mach–Zehnder interferometers are connected in parallel and series 131.

The central challenge to build a quantum computer is to scale up a qubit system. For the latest technological

stage, millions of physical qubits would be required 132. This scalability problem is inherent to any qubit that

needs to be addressed individually via an external parameter such as a gate voltage or a laser. Important issues

to be solved on the way to build a universal quantum computer are presently the improvements of the ﬁdelity

of the qubits as well as their connectivity 133.

Electron ﬂying qubits using Levitons could allow one to implement an original architecture to build a

universal quantum computer as schematized in Fig. 7. Although the architecture of Fig. 7 is a theorist view

at this stage, it has very appealing features, in particular the fact that it is structurally diﬀerent from the

mainstream approach that uses localized qubits. Indeed in the mainstream approach, the hardware corresponds

directly to each qubit: for instance for spin qubits, one needs a certain number of electrostatic gates per qubit to

conﬁne the electron, address it with microwaves and eventually measure its state. It follows that the hardware

footprint is proportional to the number of qubits. In contrast, in this ’synchrotron-like’ quantum computer,

the ﬂying qubits are stored in a loop and fast quantum routers are used to bring them to single-qubit gates,

two-qubit gates, delay lines or measuring apparatus 134. Hence, the hardware footprint can in principle be

extremely small: a few quantum routers (one per type of gates or measurement) are suﬃcient to control an

arbitrarily large number of qubits. The Leviton qubits are created on demand and one only needs a loop, which

is large enough to hold Levitons while they go around it.

The second, perhaps more important, advantage of this architecture is the connectivity of the two qubit

gates: using the delay line shown in the schematic, one could move the qubits so that any pair of ﬂying qubits

could be put next to each other and, hence, one could apply two qubit gates between any 2 qubits. This is again

in contrast to the mainstream approach where each qubit being localized, it can only interact with a few other

qubits, usually its nearest neighbours. Such a dramatic increase in connectivity could have deep consequences

to reduce the overhead of quantum error correction and fault tolerant operations.

Another advantage of the ﬂying qubit architecture for quantum computing is that qubits can easily be

11

recycled: old qubits can be expelled from the loop and fresh ones incorporated while ancilla ones can be used to

calibrate or test the various parts of the circuit in order to isolate and retune sections that are not performing

correctly. This ﬂexibility could again be very instrumental in quantum error correction in order to get rid of

rare lethal errors. Indeed, in quantum error correction, not all errors are equal; some, even if rare, are lethal to

the calculation 135. In this respect, a long-term advantage of the ﬂying qubit architecture is the possibility to

correct these rare errors. Altogether a functional ﬂying qubit technology could make quantum error correction

aﬀordable, bringing the millions of qubits which are required to build a fault tolerant quantum computer down

to tens of thousands. Alternatively, the electron-ﬂying-qubit approach could be used to complement other

approaches by providing a ‘quantum bus’ that implements the missing long-range coupling between distant

localised qubits. Experimentally, we are still in the early stage of the development of such a electron-ﬂying-

qubit platform. Yet, it is very interesting and appealing to see that it leads to a conceptually very distinct

object from the localized qubit approach. This means in return that there is a lot of room for a new architecture

to be invented to bypass the intrinsic limitations of the ones that are pursued so far.

To end this section on the experimental progress on electron ﬂying qubits realised in semiconductor devices,

we would also like to point out promising approaches to manipulating single electrons on other unique platforms.

Alternative to the here-described semiconductor devices, single electrons can be conﬁned on the surface of

liquid helium 136–139 or rare earth atoms such as neon, argon or krypton 140. These systems provide a two-

dimensional electron system with ultra-high mobility and strong Coulomb interaction. Similar to SAW-driven

single-electron transport discussed in section 2.1, electrons on the surface of liquid helium can be transported

with very high precision through coupling to an evanescent piezoelectric SAW 139. Besides that, electrons can

be attracted to the surface of a solid crystal made from rare-earth atoms in vacuum. For the case of a solid

neon substrate, a single electron has been trapped with electrostatic gates and coupled to a superconducting

microwave resonator 140. This allowed to observe coherent coupling of motional electron states to a single

microwave photon with coherence properties similar to state-of-the-art charge qubits 141.

3 Numerical modelling of quantum devices

Numerical simulations play an important role in the development of quantum computing architectures and

the ﬂying qubit platform is no exception. Achieving a full stack of numerical tools to compute and predict the

various properties of the devices is key to certify that the devices behave as they are supposed to and allows

one to eventually optimise their behaviour. Figure 8 shows a typical stack that is being developed for ﬂying

qubit architectures. At the bottom are the device simulations that incorporate the material modelling as well as

the geometry of the device. These are usually performed at the self-consistent electrostatic quantum level, i.e.

the electrostatic problem is solved simultaneously with the quantum problem associated with the active part

of the device (typically the region around the GaAs/AlGaAs interface in the devices discussed in this article).

The self-consistent potential can be used by quantum solvers to calculate the quantum transport properties of

the device, e.g. the conductance or the current noise or other observables. Those properties can be directly

compared to DC experimental measurements to obtain a direct feedback on the quality of the modelling and its

calibration. The proprietary nextnano 142 platform or the open-source KWANT software 143 are complementary

tools that can be used for this stage.

Once the static properties are well understood, one can proceed to simulate the propagation of the electron

12

ﬂying qubits, including voltage pulses and the associated Levitons, in real time. The TKWANT extension 144 of

KWANT provides the necessary environment for such simulations (e.g., to study the role of Coulomb repulsion

at the time-dependent mean ﬁeld level). The next level is a proper treatment of many-body eﬀects aiming to

account for e.g. interactions between diﬀerent Levitons or various relaxation and dephasing mechanisms (such

as one electron decaying into two electrons and one hole). We note that there are no general purpose simulation

approaches that can handle this problem in a “blackbox” way. At the top of the stack are “pure” quantum

computer simulators where the actual underlying physics has been hidden and one simulates only the eﬀective

dynamics of the computational degrees of freedom (potentially with some extra noise or dissipation terms to

account for the actual limitations of the devices). As indicated by the arrows on the schematic, the diﬀerent

parts of the stack provide parameters to calibrate the other levels. As one goes up the stack, one usually must

give up some microscopic details in order for the computations to remain aﬀordable. Therefore, the calibrations

must be done with care for the errors not to accumulate. Below, we focus at ﬁrst on the static simulation part of

the stack with a special emphasis on the calibration of the simulations with respect to the experiments and on

the modelling of real nanodevices. At the end of this section, we brieﬂy address time-resolved and many-body

simulations.

3.1 Static quantum mechanical simulations

Tuning a single qubit into optimal operation is so far a tedious task. An attempt to ﬁnd such conditions

trying various setups at random is time and resource consuming. In order to go easier beyond experimental

proof of concept (also known as Technology Readiness Level (TRL) 3), it is thus crucial being able to predict

the viability of a certain sample design prior to its physical realisation. As outlined above, precise potential

calculations combined with dynamic quantum mechanical simulations are playing a key role in this regard

enabling validation of electron-ﬂying-qubit technology in the lab (TRL 4). Being able to predict the reliability

of a certain sample geometry paves the way to implement and setup electron ﬂying qubits in a reproducible

manner – enabling validation of the technology in a demonstrative or even commercial setting (TRL 5 and 6).

Since the basic elements of the electron ﬂying qubits (interconnects, TCWs and interferometers) are ex-

ploiting to a great extent single-particle physics, they require high-quality quantum mechanical simulations for

one electron in complicated electrostatic potentials. The necessary information is obtained from a numerical

solution of the stationary Schr¨odinger equation, see Eq. (4) below. The precise solution can be found by using a

platform such as the nextnano software. Its advantages include the possibility to adapt the numerical procedure

for diﬀerent materials, various geometries of the nanoconductors and shapes of the gate-induced potentials.

Let us review the basics of the static quantum mechanical simulations, some features of the nextnano tools,

and provide examples of how these tools can be used for calibration of the experiments and engineering the

nanodevices.

3.1.1 Basic equations and methods of static single-particle simulations

Basic targets of the static quantum mechanical simulations include the study of the shape of electron wave

functions and the energy-dependent transmission through one nanounit and through the entire circuit 145–147.

The transverse proﬁle (i.e. along the direction being perpendicular to the propagation direction) allows one to

judge whether the quantum wires are close to the desirable setup and to control, e.g., the absence (presence) of

13

tunnelling between two isolated (coupled) wires. Ballistic transmission of the electron through the circuit is even

more important. When various units are connected, there are always spatial inhomogeneities which can result

in reﬂection of the propagating electron. The reﬂection hinders the ﬂying qubits from their normal operation

and must be minimised as much as possible. To this end, one can numerically ﬁnd an energy corresponding to

transparency windows for a realistic circuit and to work further in a vicinity of this special energy range.

The quantum mechanical system can be modeled at diﬀerent levels of approximations that range from a semi-

classical description to an eﬀective mass approximation to a multi-band k·p model. Considering conduction-band

electrons within the single-band approximation, the envelope wave functions, ψn, are solutions of the stationary

Schr¨odinger equation

ˆHψn(x) = Enψn(x),

(4)

where ˆH is the Hamiltonian operator of the closed quantum system, En are the energy levels deﬁning the

energy spectrum of the system, n are quantum numbers marking diﬀerent single electron quantum states, and

x = (x, y, z) is the space coordinate. The Hamiltonian operator

ˆH = (cid:15)(ˆp) + V (x)

(5)

is the sum of a kinetic energy operator (cid:15)(ˆp) and a potential energy V (x), where the electron momentum

operator is deﬁned in the standard way as ˆp = −i(cid:126)∇. Here, (cid:15)(ˆp, x) is the (possibly position-dependent)

dispersion relation describing the momentum dependence of the electron energy which accounts for all eﬀects

governed by the crystalline lattice, and V (x) is the inhomogeneous potential in which the electron propagates.

V (x) contains the electrostatic potential and conduction band oﬀsets at material interfaces. For example, in

the simple case of a homogeneous isotropic material where the electrons move almost freely, one can use the

eﬀective mass approximation which yields (cid:15)(p) = (p2

x + p2

y + p2

z)/2m∗, where m∗ is the eﬀective mass of the

electron in the material.

The potential φ(x) describes the electrostatics within the system and is the solution of the Poisson equation

∇ · [ε(x)∇φ(x)] = −ρ(x),

(6)

where ε(x) is the material-dependent permittivity, and ρ(x) is the charge density throughout the system. This

charge density is given by

ρ(x) = e (cid:2)−n(x) + p(x) + N +

D (x) − N −

A (x)(cid:3) + ρﬁxed(x),

(7)

where n(x) and p(x) are the electron and hole densities, and N +

A (x) are the ionized donor and
acceptor concentrations, respectively, e is the (positive) elementary charge, and ρﬁxed(x) contains immobile

D (x) and N −

space or surface charges.

Here, the electron density n(x) explicitly depends on the energy levels En and envelope wave functions ψn

from Schr¨odinger’s equation, Eqs. (4,5). For a ﬁnite system at equilibrium, the electron density is given by

n(x) =

(cid:88)

n

2|ψn(x)|2
1 + exp((En − EF)/kBT )

,

(8)

where EF is the Fermi level (or chemical potential), T is the temperature, and kB is the Boltzmann constant.

Thus, the electrostatic potential φ(x) depends on the energy levels En and wave functions ψn, but also enters the

Schr¨odinger equation, Eqs. (4,5), as part of the potential energy operator V (x). This shows that the Schr¨odinger

equation and Poisson equation (Eq. (6)) are coupled and need to be solved self-consistently.

14

The self-consistently obtained spectrum and wave functions can be used further to calculate quantities

which explain and describe quantum transport through various nanodevices connected to external leads. Two

such quantities are (i) the partial local density of states (pLDoS), n(x, y, E), and (ii) the energy dependent

transmission, Tij(E). The pLDoS is the probability to ﬁnd in a given space-point the propagating electron

which has a given energy, E, and has been injected in a given lead. We note in passing that the local density of

states is the sum of the pLDoS over all leads. Hence, the coordinate dependence of pLDoS illustrates how the

electron with a given energy propagates through the device 148. The energy dependent transmission, Tij(E), is

determined by the probability for the electron which is injected into lead i to reach lead j.

The pLDoS and the transmission from one lead to another can be found by using the retarded Green’s
function, ˆGR(E) = ([E + iα]ˆ1 − ˆH)−1 where E is the electron energy and α → 0+ is a mathematical regularizer

which reﬂects the retardation of the physical response (see Ref. 148 and Ref. 149 for details).

In the space-

coordinate representation, the coordinate-dependent Green’s function can be expressed via the wave functions

and the spectrum (the so-called spectral and Lehmann representations). Hence, the solution of the Schr¨odinger

equation provides the input needed for the theoretical study of transmission.

The transmission provides valuable information on quantum interference occurring in the TCW or the

Aharonov–Bohm (AB) interferometer. In the original setup, the AB interferometer involves the magnetic ﬁeld,

B = curlA, which can be included into the study as a shift of the momentum operator by the vector potential,

ˆp → ˆp − eA. In practice, a magnetic ﬁeld variation is too slow on the time scales needed for qubit operation,

so electrostatic manipulation of the gates is much more practical. Nevertheless, for optimisation of the design,

experiments and simulations in the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld are still useful.

Schr¨odinger’s equation can only be solved analytically for some specially chosen potentials, whereas, in the

general case, spectra and wave functions can only be found numerically. The numerical solvers are applied

after discretization, which means that the continuous space is reduced to points on a grid and derivatives are

substituted by diﬀerences. Here, the grid spacing is an important parameter which controls the accuracy of the

numerically obtained answers. In our qubit devices, layer structures and dopant distributions create a triangular

shaped quantum well along the substrate growth direction. In this quantum well, quantum conﬁnement eﬀects

cause the electrons to form a two-dimensional electron gas which is modulated in the two directions perpendicular

to the substrate growth direction in accordance with the inﬂuence of the gate geometries. For such 3D devices

where thousands of eigenstates have to be taken into account, eﬃcient solvers for the Poisson and Schr¨odinger

equations such as preconditioned conjugate gradient for Poisson and Arnoldi iteration for Schr¨odinger are

mandatory in order to overcome the huge computational costs. Moreover, achieving self-consistency between

the Poisson and the Schr¨odinger equation is not easy and requires the use of special techniques such as predictor–

corrector methods 150 in order to robustly obtain solutions. In strongly non-linear regimes such as in the quantum

Hall regime, other techniques such as 151 might be needed.

As we have already mentioned, the simulation of quantum transport and thus obtaining the pLDoS and the

transmission requires the use of Green’s function techniques 152, which are computationally extremely expensive

in the most general case. Fortunately, the ballistic limit of quantum transport suﬃces for the accurate description

of ﬂying qubits. This allows the so-called Contact Block Reduction (CBR) method 149,153 to be used here in

order to reduce the computational cost down to a point that even large three-dimensional devices of arbitrary

shape and with an arbitrary number of contacts can be easily modelled.

15

3.1.2 The nextnano software and its applications for engineering ﬂying qubits

Starting from the year 2000, the nextnano software had been developed at the Walter Schottky Institute

of the Technische Universit¨at M¨unchen. Later, it resulted in the spin-oﬀ company nextnano GmbH. The

software, which is now further developed by this company, is a user-oriented platform meant for modelling

various semiconductor-based nanodevices, cf. Refs. 142,154,155, including optoelectronic elements and qubits.

The main focus is on the simulation of the quantum mechanical properties of such devices. The nextnano’s core

product, the nextnano++ software 142, is a 3D Schr¨odinger–Poisson–Current/CBR solver for nanotransistors,

LEDs, laser diodes, photodetectors, quantum dots, nanowires, solar cells and qubits. The second product,

nextnano.NEGF 152, is a quantum transport solver targeting quantum cascade lasers and resonant tunneling

diodes. The nextnano software (including its early versions) has been successfully used to optimise the design

of semiconductor-based (charge and spin) qubits 156–161. Below, we focus on several important applications of

this software for engineering the electron ﬂying qubits.

Appropriate models for quantitative simulations: Quantum devices made from GaAs semiconductor

heterostructures can easily be engineered by proper design of the gate geometry. To ensure the best performance

of the electronic device – that is to ﬁnd the most suitable gate geometry – it is crucial to know the exact

electrostatic potential landscape generated by the electrostatic gates. This requires to take into account the

material parameters such as 2DEG density and mobility, dopants concentration, induced surface charges, etc.

Traditionally, the workﬂow to determine the optimum gate geometries for a given heterostructure has been

an iterative process between device fabrication in clean room facilities and low-temperature characterisations.

This is immensely time consuming and resource demanding. The ideal workﬂow is presented in Fig. 9 where

the iterative process takes place mainly at the modelling stage, before the device fabrication.

To ﬁnd an accurate model for quantitative simulations, Chatzikyriakou et al. 162 developed a model using the

nextnano software and benchmarked it with experimentally measured QPCs with a wide range of geometries.

They assumed a layer of surface charges and a spatially uniform doping concentration, both having a frozen

ionization state due to the very low temperatures at which the experimental measurements are taken 31,163. First,

1D simulations of GaAs/AlGaAs heterostructures (Fig. 10a), with a Schottky gate on top, are employed in order

to deduce the doping concentration such that the simulation reproduces experimentally measured characteristics

of these heterostructures that exist on the chip that hosts the QPCs. These structures are covered by metal

electrodes that are very large compared to the QPC gates (> 500 nm in each Cartesian direction) and that are

ﬁnally connected to the QPC gates. Then, removing the gate from the simulated heterostructure, the surface

charges are adjusted so that the 2DEG electron density is equal to that taken from Hall measurements on the

same wafer, at T = 4.2 K (frozen surface states). To simulate the region where electron transport takes place,

3D simulations are carried out with the exact gate geometry of the quantum device. These gate geometries

are directly imported from the computer-aided design (CAD) layouts (standard ﬁles in GDS format) using the

open-source Python package nextnanopy 164.

Figure 10 shows a typical example of electron depletion in the 2DEG when applying a gate voltage to the

electrostatic gates that face each other. When a small negative voltage is applied, the electron density under the

gates is ﬁrst depleted, forming only a narrow 1D constriction in the center of the two gates. Reducing further

the voltage, the 1D channel is completely depleted and the transport channel is pinched-oﬀ. The simulation

shows a remarkable agreement with the experimental pinch-oﬀ value (VG = −1.8 V).

16

In the same spirit, one can use such simulations to calculate the potential variations seen by the electrons

within the 2DEG. An example of a complex quantum device with a tunnel-coupled wire from Takada et al. 31

is shown in Fig. 11. Using the exact gate geometries and voltages from the experiment, the electrostatic

simulations reveal the variation of the potential along the path which an electron would follow before entering

the tunnel-coupled region (black line). In these experiments, the single electron is excited to higher energy states

which were attributed to the abruptness in the potential landscape at this location. This undesired excitation

could be mitigated by optimising the device geometries thanks to quantitative modellings.

The shape of the electrostatic potential in the 2DEG plane is input to further calculations of the energy-

dependent transmission function which corresponds to the probability that an electron is reﬂected or transmitted

along the diﬀerent paths in the ﬂying qubit structure. One-dimensional cuts through this potential in the uncou-

pled wires (blue) and within (red) the tunnel-coupled regions are shown in Fig. 11b. One can see parabolically

shaped double-well conﬁnement potentials, cf. Fig. 1c. Such potentials and the interplay between symmetric

and anti-symmetric states with respect to the direction perpendicular to the propagation direction have been

analyzed numerically in Ref. 145 where detailed features of the transport measurements such as in-phase and

anti-phase oscillations of the two output currents as well as a smooth phase shift when sweeping a side gate

have been reproduced. By injecting an electron into the upper rail |0(cid:105), the wave function will evolve into a

superposition of symmetric and anti-symmetric states. While travelling through the interaction region, the wave

function of the electron will then pick up a phase and will evolve into a superposition of |0(cid:105) and |1(cid:105) 7 as shown

in Fig. 12 by a simulation example.

Simulations of pLDoS and transmission through nanodevices: Eq. (1) describes how the ideal

electron ﬂying qubit is expected to operate: The electron is injected in either the upper or lower incoming

channel (see Fig. 1b) and propagates without reﬂection through the quantum device, where the electron state is

rotated in the Hilbert space. This rotation can be illustrated with the help of the Bloch sphere, Fig. 1a. Angles

θ and φ are generated by the tunneling regions and interferometers, respectively. The output state is a coherent

superposition of the states |0(cid:105) and |1(cid:105). It is controlled by the tunneling barriers and either by the magnetic ﬁeld

or by the asymmetric bias of the interferometer. Since using the magnetic ﬁeld is technologically inconvenient,

we focus in this section on the asymmetrically biased interferometers.

There are two points which have fundamental importance for engineering the electron ﬂying qubits. Namely,

one needs an experimental setup where, on one hand, the reﬂection is reduced to a minimum and, on the other

hand, the sensitivity of the electron state to the respective gate voltages is high. Let us explain how using the

nextnano software helps to ﬁnd such a setup.

To this end, nextnano enables the calculation of the pLDoS and the transmission of the nanodevices using

the CBR method 149,153. In the following, we demonstrate such calculation via two cases that are the central

building blocks of the electron-ﬂying-qubit architecture. Firstly (see left columns of Fig. 12 and Fig. 13), we

address electron propagation through a tunnel-coupled wire (TCW). We remind readers that here at y = 0 a

narrow potential barrier is present between two transport channels that allows for coherent tunneling of the

electron. Secondly (see right columns of Fig. 12 and Fig. 13), we investigate electron propagation through a

quantum interferometer (compare Fig. 1b,d) where two TCWs embrace an AB island enabling full control of

the quantum state via magnetic and geometric phase manipulations. The potential proﬁle of both models is

shown in Fig. 13a,d. For such study of a nanoscale device, materials properties have to be speciﬁed in the

nextnano input ﬁle such that the potential energies are properly set. We have used GaAs for the device and

17

leads, and adjusted the potential energy in diﬀerent regions representing high insulating barriers (red lines),

tunneling barriers (light blue lines), and gates (green regions). The potential energy at the gates can be tuned

by applying gate voltages and the strengths of the barriers are given in Fig. 13 and its caption.

Several examples of the pLDoS are shown in Fig. 12 which have been generated using the nextnano software.

In these simulations, the electron has been injected into lead no. 1 with a given energy that is E = 9.2 meV for

TCW and E = 7.5 meV for the quantum interferometer (TCW–AB–TCW). Slices of the pLDoS are shown at

these energies.

Let us ﬁrst discuss the TCW (left column of Fig. 12) for diﬀerent voltages (VT) applied on the tunnel-barrier

gate. The TCW is able to change only the angle θ – see Eq. (1). Thus, the output state can be written as

|Ψ(cid:105)TCW ∝ cos(θ/2)|0(cid:105) + sin(θ/2)|1(cid:105). When the tunneling barrier is absent (Fig. 13a), one observes at the output

an equal superposition of |0(cid:105) and |1(cid:105) which can occur at either θ = π/2 or θ = 3π/2, both corresponding to two

points on the equator of the Bloch sphere (Fig. 1). Since a small increase of VT drives the output state to |0(cid:105)

(Fig. 13b) corresponding to the north pole of the Bloch sphere, we conclude that in barrier-less setup θ = 3π/2.

With further increasing VT, the output state becomes |1(cid:105), i.e. the south pole of the Bloch sphere (Fig. 13c,

θ = π) and returns to the equator (Fig. 13d, θ = π/2). The latter point is the opposite equator point to that of

the barrier-less setup. When the tunneling barrier becomes high (Fig. 12d) one enters the regime of two fully

decoupled transport channels with output state |0(cid:105). Clearly, these coherent tunnel oscillations of the electron

wave function manifest itself in the quantum oscillations of the transmission via TCW (see Fig. 13c).

Secondly, let us focus on electron propagation through the quantum interferometer (Fig. 12f-j). Increasing

the potential on a side gate of the lower transport channel (Vg) modiﬁes the geometric phase of the electron’s

quantum state and changes the second angle φ in Eq. (1). This, in turn, causes coherent oscillations between the

output terminals 3 and 4, i.e. oscillations between output states |0(cid:105) and |1(cid:105), and results in quantum oscillations

of the TCW–AB–TCW transmission (see Fig. 13f). The tunnel regions in the example of Figs. 12f-j are the

same and each of them changes the angle θ by π/2. This is apparent from Fig. 12a where Vg = 0 and φ = 0:

the output state after successive rotation in two TCW regions is |1(cid:105), i.e. the total change of θ in the TCWs is

π. Therefore, each individual connection changes θ by π/2. This allows one to approximate the output state

as |Ψ(cid:105)TCW−AB−TCW ∝ (eiφ − 1)|0(cid:105) + (eiφ + 1)|1(cid:105) 7. Similar to the analysis of the pLDoS in the TCW, we can

now trace rotations of the electron state with increasing Vg. Two output states shown in Fig. 12g,i correspond

to two opposite points on the equator of the Bloch sphere with φ = π/2 and φ = 3π/2. The south pole of the

Bloch sphere is reached in Fig. 12j despite a substantial blockage of the lower transport path by the strong gate

potential of the side gate.

To conclude the discussion of the pLDoS, we note that a detailed analysis of the ﬂying qubit geometry in

relation with experiments has also been performed using a combination of the theoretical approach and the

KWANT software, see Ref. 145.

Having discussed electron propagation at a qualitative level via the pLDoS, let us now investigate electron

propagation in a more quantitative way employing energy dependent transmission, Tij(E) from the ﬁrst lead

to the output leads no. 3 and no. 4. First, we study the dependence on the injection energy (Fig. 13b,e). The

energy of the incoming electron is counted from the potential energy of the lead no. 1. All device parameters

are ﬁxed at this stage. Transmission is zero if the electron energy is smaller than the energy of propagating

states of the device, that is below 6.2 meV for the chosen parameters. Above this threshold, transmission starts

to grow. However, it is ﬁrst accompanied by substantial reﬂection of the electron to the input leads no. 1 and

18

no. 2 which are described by T11 and T12 (not shown). This is apparent in the central panels of Fig. 13, up to

an energy of about 7 meV, where the total transmission, Ttotal = T13 + T14 (magenta lines), is smaller than the

ideal value, Ttotal < Tideal = 1. In a second step, we have identiﬁed the energy at which Ttotal (cid:39) 1 (i.e. reﬂection

is minimised) but T13, T14 (cid:54)= 0, 1.

In this regime, we expect strong sensitivity of the electron state |ψ(cid:105), Eq. (1),

to the gates and the barriers of the quantum device. Two examples of these energies are shown by red dashed

vertical lines and are studied at the second stage of the simulations. Fixing these two energies for the TCW and

the quantum interferometer, we have studied the dependence of the transmission on the potential of the tunnel

barrier, VT (Fig. 13c), and the side gate, Vg (Fig. 13f). The goal of this stage is twofold: We identify regions of

the parameters where Ttotal (magenta lines) is close to the ideal value of 1 and, simultaneously, the rotation of

the electron states is pronounced. The latter condition is fulﬁlled by the crossover between regimes T13 < T14

and T13 > T14. The vicinity of the crossover can be chosen as an operation range of the qubit (or of the qubit

element), provided the reﬂection is almost absent.

In order to ﬁnd optimal parameters which provide both

ideal transmission and range for manipulation of the quantum phase, simulations such as the here-discussed

case are helpful to identify experimentally relevant voltage ranges. The here-discussed simulations indicate

that suﬃcient control is obtained in TCW and AB regions with the length ≥ 500 nm and further allow to

identify optimal operation voltages. Let us discuss these aspects in more detail for the TCW and the quantum

interferometer.

TCW: A simple phenomenological scattering theory predicts that T13 (cid:39) cos2(δφTCW/2), T14 (cid:39) sin2(δφTCW/2),

δφTCW ≡ δkLTCW, where δk = k1 − k2 is the diﬀerence of wave vectors of two modes with the lowest energy,

which support the transmission, and LTCW is the eﬀective spatial scale of the region, where the tunneling takes
place 7. The quantum phase δφTCW is expected to grow with increasing the length of the tunneling barrier,

Ltun, which is equal to 300 nm in the example of the left column of Fig. 13. We distinguish LTCW and Ltun since

the former depends on the shape of the electrostatic potential inside the device. Therefore, one may expect

LTCW (cid:28) Ltun. This inequality has been conﬁrmed by a comparison of the scattering theory (green and cyan

dots in Fig. 13c) with the outcome of the true 2D simulations (solid lines in the same ﬁgure). LTCW is the

only adjustable parameter of this comparison. The value of δk has been found by using the dispersion relation
of almost free electrons propagating in a semiconductor, E1,2 = ((cid:126)k1,2)2/2m∗. Energy levels E1,2 have been

obtained from 1D simulations of the spectrum at the 1D transverse cross section in the center of the device

(dashed line in Fig. 13a). Interestingly, the ratio LTCW/Ltun is almost insensitive to the transverse size of the

device. An excellent agreement between the 2D simulations and the scattering theory suggests that the latter

can be used as a compact model of TCW in simulations of more complicated circuits. Such a simpliﬁcation

will allow one to minimize computer resources needed for the simulations. The inset in Fig. 13c shows that

the range of VT, where the quantum oscillations occur, shrinks with making Ltun, and correspondingly the

space for the quantum interference, smaller. Since Ttotal is very close to 1 (no reﬂection) in the entire range

0 < VT < 1 eV, such an idealized qubit would operate properly in a vicinity of any crossover point where

T13 (cid:39) T14, e.g. VT ∼ 0.1 eV or VT ∼ 0.33 eV.

Interferometer: When the electron modes propagate through the upper and lower arms of the electrostatic

version of the Aharanov–Bohm interferometer, they acquire a relative phase which governs the quantum in-

terference. If the interferometer is connected directly to the leads, the transmission through the device can
be estimated as TAB = cos2 (e δV τAB/2(cid:126)) 165. Here, τAB is the ﬂight time of the electron through the unit.

In the ballistic case, it is the ratio of the interferometer length over the electron velocity, τAB = LAB/v. We

19

have introduced the relative total potential, δV = Vu − Vl (integrated over the upper, Vu, or lower, Vl, arm),

which the electron feels inside the interferometer. The interference oscillations are more pronounced in longer

devices, compare results presented in Fig. 13f and its inset. To avoid complexity, we do not discuss here semi-

phenomenological analytical calculation of transmission for the composite TCW–AB–TCW device and do not

compare the scattering theory with the 2D simulations. Similar to the TCW device, it is useful to tune Vg to

the vicinity of the crossover point where T13 (cid:39) T14, i.e. either Vg ∼ 0.1 eV or Vg ∼ 0.5 eV in the example of

Fig. 13f. Note, however, that Ttotal < 1 in both cases. Clearly, the preference should be given to the regime

with smaller reﬂection, i.e. the second crossover point in the simulated example.

The above predictions of numerical simulations serve as important input for experimental realisations of the

ﬂying qubit. Integrating the simulation additionally in a feedback loop of the workﬂow (Fig. 9) would enable to

ﬁnd optimised device geometries tailored to the diﬀerent approaches such as Levitons or SAW. To conclude this

section, we would like to mention that the applications of the nextnano software can be very broad since it can

straightforwardly be adapted for modelling devices made from other semiconductor materials (e.g., industrially

highly relevant SiGe), for including eﬀects of the magnetic ﬁeld on the interferometer, for mimicking dephasing

and decoherence with the help of the artiﬁcially connected leads, to name just a few.

3.2 Low energy time-resolved and many-body simulations

In the previous section, we have focused on the simulation of the static properties of the devices. Solving the

corresponding quantum-electrostatic problem allows one to understand how macroscopic parameters, usually

the geometry of the electrostatic gates that are set to typical values of order ≤ 1 eV, inﬂuence the active

quantum part of the device where the relevant energies are in the meV range. Once this is understood, the next

step is to simulate actual time-resolved experiments that involve sub-meV physics (typical time in the 1−100 ps

range). The goal is to understand the propagation of pulses, the coupling between diﬀerent pulses (at the origin

of the two-ﬂying-qubits gates), the renormalisation of the velocity due to Coulomb interactions 53 and other

eﬀects such as diﬀerent decoherence and relaxation channels. These theoretical developments are very much

on-going research for which no standard approaches have yet emerged. As in-depth discussion of these aspects

goes beyond the scope of the present review, we refer to Ref. 7 for pointers to the literature or to Ref. 166 for an

introduction to the non-interacting formalism and to Ref. 144 for illustrative time-dependent simulations of the

propagation of voltage pulses, in particular in the quantum Hall regime 167.

These methods have not been included into the nextnano software, however, TKWANT, the time-dependent

extension of the KWANT software is able to provide an appropriate platform which is complementary to the

nextnano one. Both KWANT and TKWANT software packages are distributed under the BSD license which

imposes minimal restrictions on the use and distribution of this software. Consequently, algorithms developed

by the KWANT team could be incorporated into commercial software packages targeting speciﬁc quantum

industry applications, such as electron-ﬂying-qubit devices. The principal developers of KWANT are from CEA

Grenoble and TU Delft.

Note that there are no general purpose simulation approaches that can handle many-body problems in an

exact and systematic way except in very particular cases. Most approaches rely on some approximation scheme

whose validity must be checked a posteriori. A promising route followed by some of us to design a systematic

method with a controlled accuracy uses calculations of high order processes (i.e. processes where electrons

20

interact strongly) made possible by the use of a machine learning approach to evaluate the corresponding high

dimensional integrals 168.

4 Conclusion and outlook

The realisation of ﬂying qubits with single electrons opens a novel, viable route of quantum technology

with considerable potential for quantum-computation applications.

In this review we introduced the novel

electron-ﬂying-qubit approach and discussed three equally promising transport techniques – surface acoustic

waves (SAW), hot-electron emission from quantum-dot pumps and Levitons – which are rapidly advancing.

Owing to similarities between the diﬀerent approaches – such as emission from a gate-deﬁned quantum dot

in SAW-transport and the electron pump – we suspect that progress in one-ﬁeld will also drive the others.

Based on latest progress and relevant simulation cases, we showed that numerical modelling of quantum devices

is decisive to speed up experimental deployment cycles towards the ﬁrst implementation of an electron ﬂying

qubit. We anticipate that automatised optimisation of the device design via numerical modelling will enable

nanofabrication tailored for eﬃcient quantum operations.

In order to make the electron ﬂying qubit competitive with cutting-edge approaches in the ﬁeld of quantum

computation, it is of central importance to develop ultrafast real-time control of quantum operations. An

appealing approach to implement such in-ﬂight quantum operations is to use ultrafast voltage pulses in the

picosecond range and below. On-chip optoelectronic conversion of a femtosecond laser pulse is so far the

most promising technique to generate electrical pulses on the picosecond scale 116–118. Combined with recent

conversion eﬃciency improvements of these optoelectronic devices 119,120,169,170, such a real-time control is in

reach and is currently pursued in the UltraFastNano project. Using these techniques, single-electron wave packets

with a temporal width of 1 ps can be generated. The thus-enabled miniaturisation of quantum interferometers

will allow the implementation of hundreds of quantum operations within the coherence time. Furthermore,

ultrafast gate control will provide a possibility to resolve quantum states in real time. Rather than measuring

the coherent oscillations of the electron qubits by varying the strength of the tunnel coupling 42, one can simply

control the tunnel barrier in a time-resolved manner. This enables to keep the electrostatic conﬁnement potential

of the entire device constant and only vary the tunnel barrier on the time scale needed for the quantum operation.

The progress in the ﬁeld strongly depends on the availability of tools for the reliable modelling of the

quantum devices. The simulations must possess enough predictive power to suggest the most suitable device

geometry prior to the fabrication of the device in a clean room. Iterations and tests of the devices are costly and

time consuming and should be reduced to the strict minimum with the help of the high-precision professional

simulations. Adding more and more qubits into quantum circuits will increase drastically the experimental

parameter space for device tuning. Therefore, automatic tuning of all the gate voltages by using concepts

from artiﬁcial intelligence and machine-learning would have to be implemented in platforms for the theoretical

modelling. We anticipate that the synergy of semiconductor quantum technology with cutting-edge numerical

simulations paves the way for electron-ﬂying-qubit implementations fostering the industrial applicability of

quantum computation.

21

Acknowledgements

C.B. acknowledges helpful discussions with J.-M. G´erard.

Funding

We acknowledge funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under

grant agreement No. 862683 (UltraFastNano). E.C. acknowledges funding from the European Union’s Horizon

2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Sk(cid:32)lodowska-Curie grant agreement No. 840550

(PRESQUE). J.W. acknowledges funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation

programme under the Marie Sk(cid:32)lodowska-Curie grant agreement No. 754303 (GreQuE). C.B., D.C.G. and X.W.

acknowledge funding from the French National Funding Agency (ANR) through project ANR-16-CE30-0015-

02 (FullyQuantum). C.B. and G.G. acknowledge funding from the French National Funding Agency (ANR)

through project ANR- 19-CE47-0005 (STEPforQUBITS).

Availability of data and materials

Numerical codes and tutorials can be found at https://kwant-project.org and https://www.nextnano.com.

References

[1] DiVincenzo, D.P.: The Physical Implementation of Quantum Computation. Fortschritte der Physik 48(9-

11), 771–783 (2000). doi:10.1002/1521-3978(200009)48:9/11<771::AID-PROP771>3.0.CO;2-E

[2] Wehner, S., Elkouss, D., Hanson, R.: Quantum internet: A vision for the road ahead. Science 362(6412),

9288 (2018). doi:10.1126/science.aam9288

[3] Peruzzo, A., McClean, J., Shadbolt, P., Yung, M.-H., Zhou, X.-Q., Love, P.J., Aspuru-Guzik, A., O’Brien,

J.L.: A variational eigenvalue solver on a photonic quantum processor. Nature Communications 5(1), 4213

(2014). doi:10.1038/ncomms5213

[4] Knill, E., Laﬂamme, R., Milburn, G.J.: A scheme for eﬃcient quantum computation with linear optics.

Nature 409(6816), 46–52 (2001). doi:10.1038/35051009

[5] Kok, P., Munro, W.J., Nemoto, K., Ralph, T.C., Dowling, J.P., Milburn, G.J.: Linear optical quantum

computing with photonic qubits. Rev. Mod. Phys. 79, 135–174 (2007). doi:10.1103/RevModPhys.79.135

[6] Lodahl, P.: Quantum-dot based photonic quantum networks. Quantum Science and Technology 3(1),

013001 (2018). doi:10.1088/2058-9565/aa91bb

[7] B¨auerle, C., Glattli, D.C., Meunier, T., Portier, F., Roche, P., Roulleau, P., Takada, S., Waintal, X.:

Coherent control of single electrons: a review of current progress. Rep. Prog. Phys. 81(5), 056503 (2018).

doi:10.1088/1361-6633/aaa98a

[8] Clauser, J.F.: Experimental distinction between the quantum and classical ﬁeld-theoretic predictions for

the photoelectric eﬀect. Phys. Rev. D 9, 853–860 (1974). doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.9.853

22

[9] Eisaman, M.D., Fan, J., Migdall, A., Polyakov, S.V.: Invited Review Article: Single-photon sources and

detectors. Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 82(7), 071101 (2011). doi:10.1063/1.3610677

[10] Michler, P., Kiraz, A., Becher, C., Schoenfeld, W.V., Petroﬀ, P.M., Zhang, L., Hu, E.,

Imamoglu, A.: A Quantum Dot Single-Photon Turnstile Device. Science 290(5500), 2282–2285 (2000).

doi:10.1126/science.290.5500.2282

[11] Senellart, P., Solomon, G., White, A.: High-performance semiconductor quantum-dot single-photon

sources. Nature Nanotechnology 12(11), 1026–1039 (2017). doi:10.1038/nnano.2017.218

[12] Arcari, M., S¨ollner, I., Javadi, A., Lindskov Hansen, S., Mahmoodian, S., Liu, J., Thyrrestrup, H., Lee,

E.H., Song, J.D., Stobbe, S., Lodahl, P.: Near-Unity Coupling Eﬃciency of a Quantum Emitter to a

Photonic Crystal Waveguide. Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 093603 (2014). doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.113.093603

[13] Uppu, R., Pedersen, F.T., Wang, Y., Olesen, C.T., Papon, C., Zhou, X., Midolo, L., Scholz, S., Wieck,

A.D., Ludwig, A., Lodahl, P.: Scalable integrated single-photon source. Science Advances 6(50) (2020).

doi:10.1126/sciadv.abc8268

[14] Santori, C., Fattal, D., Vuˇckovi´c, J., Solomon, G.S., Yamamoto, Y.: Indistinguishable photons from a

single-photon device. Nature 419(6907), 594–597 (2002). doi:10.1038/nature01086

[15] He, Y.-M., He, Y., Wei, Y.-J., Wu, D., Atat¨ure, M., Schneider, C., H¨oﬂing, S., Kamp, M., Lu, C.-Y.,

Pan, J.-W.: On-demand semiconductor single-photon source with near-unity indistinguishability. Nature

nanotechnology 8(3), 213–217 (2013). doi:10.1038/nnano.2012.262

[16] Munsch, M., Malik, N.S., Dupuy, E., Delga, A., Bleuse, J., G´erard, J.-M., Claudon, J.,

Gregersen, N., Mørk, J.: Dielectric GaAs Antenna Ensuring an Eﬃcient Broadband Coupling be-

tween an InAs Quantum Dot and a Gaussian Optical Beam. Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 177402 (2013).

doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.110.177402

[17] Somaschi, N., Giesz, V., De Santis, L., Loredo, J., Almeida, M.P., Hornecker, G., Portalupi, S.L., Grange,

T., Anton, C., Demory, J., G´omez, C., Sagnes, I., Lanzillotti-Kimura, N.D., Lema´ıtre, A., Auﬀeves,

A., White, A.G., Lanco, L., Senellart, P.: Near-optimal single-photon sources in the solid state. Nature

Photonics 10(5), 340–345 (2016). doi:10.1038/nphoton.2016.23

[18] Tomm, N., Javadi, A., Antoniadis, N.O., Najer, D., L¨obl, M.C., Korsch, A.R., Schott, R., Valentin, S.R.,

Wieck, A.D., Ludwig, A., Warburton, R.J.: A bright and fast source of coherent single photons. Nature

Nanotechnology 16(4), 399–403 (2021). doi:10.1038/s41565-020-00831-x

[19] Lesovik, G.B.: Excess quantum noise in 2D ballistic point contacts. JETP Letters 49, 592–594 (1989)

[20] B¨uttiker, M.: Scattering theory of current and intensity noise correlations in conductors and wave guides.

Phys. Rev. B 46, 12485–12507 (1992). doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.46.12485

[21] Landauer, R., Martin, T.: Equilibrium and shot noise in mesoscopic systems. Physica B 175, 167–177

(1991). doi:10.1016/0921-4526(91)90710-V

23

[22] Henny, M., Oberholzer, S., Strunk, C., Heinzel, T., Ensslin, K., Holland, M., Sch¨onenberger,

C.: The Fermionic Hanbury Brown and Twiss Experiment. Science 284(5412), 296–298 (1999).

doi:10.1126/science.284.5412.296

[23] Oliver, W.D., Kim, J., Liu, R.C., Yamamoto, Y.: Hanbury Brown and Twiss-Type Experiment with

Electrons. Science 284(5412), 299–301 (1999). doi:10.1126/science.284.5412.299

[24] Liu, R.C., Odom, B., Yamamoto, Y., Tarucha, S.: Quantum interference in electron collision. Nature 391,

263 (1998)

[25] Ji, Y., Chung, Y., Sprinzak, D., Heiblum, M., Mahalu, D., Shtrikman, H.: An electronic Mach–Zehnder

interferometer. Nature 422(6930), 415–418 (2003). doi:10.1038/nature01503

[26] F`eve, G., Mah´e, A., Berroir, J.-M., Kontos, T., Pla¸cais, B., Glattli, D.C., Cavanna, A., Etienne,

B., Jin, Y.: An On-Demand Coherent Single-Electron Source. Science 316(5828), 1169–1172 (2007).

doi:10.1126/science.1141243

[27] Blumenthal, M.D., Kaestner, B., Li, L., Giblin, S., Janssen, T.J.B.M., Pepper, M., Anderson, D., Jones,

G., Ritchie, D.A.: Gigahertz quantized charge pumping. Nature Physics 3, 343 (2007)

[28] Hermelin, S., Takada, S., Yamamoto, M., Tarucha, S., Wieck, A.D., Saminadayar, L., B¨auerle, C., Meu-

nier, T.: Electrons surﬁng on a sound wave as a platform for quantum optics with ﬂying electrons. Nature

477, 435 (2011)

[29] McNeil, R.P.G., Kataoka, M., Ford, C.J.B., Barnes, C.H.W., Anderson, D., Jones, G.A.C., Farrer, I.,

Ritchie, D.A.: On-demand single-electron transfer between distant quantum dots. Nature 477, 439 (2011)

[30] Dubois, J., Jullien, T., Portier, F., Roche, P., Cavanna, A., Jin, Y., Wegscheider, W., Roulleau, P.,

Glattli, D.C.: Minimal-excitation states for electron quantum optics using levitons. Nature 502, 659

(2013). doi:10.1038/nature12713

[31] Takada, S., Edlbauer, H., Lepage, H.V., Wang, J., Mortemousque, P.-A., Georgiou, G., Barnes, C.H.W.,

Ford, C.J.B., Yuan, M., Santos, P.V., Waintal, X., Ludwig, A., Wieck, A.D., Urdampilleta, M., Meunier,

T., B¨auerle, C.: Sound-driven single-electron transfer in a circuit of coupled quantum rails. Nat. Commun.

10, 4557 (2019). doi:10.1038/s41467-019-12514-w

[32] Freise, L., Gerster, T., Reifert, D., Weimann, T., Pierz, K., Hohls, F., Ubbelohde, N.: Trap-

ping and Counting Ballistic Nonequilibrium Electrons. Phys. Rev. Lett. 124(12), 127701 (2020).

doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.124.127701

[33] Giblin, S.P., Kataoka, M., Fletcher, J.D., See, P., Janssen, T.J.B.M., Griﬃths, J.P., Jones, G.A.C., Farrer,

I., Ritchie, D.A.: Towards a quantum representation of the ampere using single electron pumps. Nature

Communications 3, 930 (2012)

[34] Stein, F., Scherer, H., Gerster, T., Behr, R., Gotz, M., Pesel, E., Leicht, C., Ubbelohde, N., Weimann,

T., Pierz, K., Schumacher, H.W., Hohls, F.: Robustness of single-electron pumps at sub-ppm current

accuracy level. Metrologia 54(1), 1 (2017). doi:10.1088/1681-7575/54/1/S1

24

[35] Moreau, E., Robert, I., G´erard, J.M., Abram, I., Manin, L., Thierry-Mieg, V.: Single-mode solid-state

single photon source based on isolated quantum dots in pillar microcavities. Applied Physics Letters

79(18), 2865–2867 (2001). doi:10.1063/1.1415346

[36] Thomas, S., Senellart, P.: The race for the ideal single-photon source is on. Nature Nanotechnology 16(4),

367–368 (2021). doi:10.1038/s41565-021-00851-1

[37] Hayashi, T., Fujisawa, T., Cheong, H.D., Jeong, Y.H., Hirayama, Y.: Coherent Manipulation

of Electronic States in a Double Quantum Dot. Physical Review Letters 91, 226804 (2003).

doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.91.226804

[38] Petta, J.R., Johnson, A.C., Marcus, C.M., Hanson, M.P., Gossard, A.C.: Manipulation of a Single Charge

in a Double Quantum Dot. Physical Review Letters 93, 186802 (2004). doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.93.186802

[39] Petersson, K.D., Petta, J.R., Lu, H., Gossard, A.C.: Quantum Coherence in a One-Electron Semiconduc-

tor Charge Qubit. Physical Review Letters 105, 246804 (2010). doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.105.246804

[40] Stockklauser, A., Scarlino, P., Koski, J.V., Gasparinetti, S., Andersen, C.K., Reichl, C., Wegschei-

der, W., Ihn, T., Ensslin, K., Wallraﬀ, A.: Strong Coupling Cavity QED with Gate-Deﬁned Dou-

ble Quantum Dots Enabled by a High Impedance Resonator. Physical Review X 7, 011030 (2017).

doi:10.1103/PhysRevX.7.011030

[41] Roulleau, P., Portier, F., Roche, P., Cavanna, A., Faini, G., Gennser, U., Mailly, D.: Direct Measurement

of the Coherence Length of Edge States in the Integer Quantum Hall Regime. Physical Review Letters

100, 126802 (2008). doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.100.126802

[42] Yamamoto, M., Takada, S., B¨auerle, C., Watanabe, K., Wieck, A.D., Tarucha, S.: Electrical control of a

solid-state ﬂying qubit. Nature Nanotechnology 7, 247–251 (2012). doi:10.1038/nnano.2012.28

[43] Duprez, H., Sivre, E., Anthore, A., Aassime, A., Cavanna, A., Ouerghi, A., Gennser, U., Pierre, F.:

Macroscopic Electron Quantum Coherence in a Solid-State Circuit. Phys. Rev. X 9, 021030 (2019).

doi:10.1103/PhysRevX.9.021030

[44] Duprez, H., Sivre, E., Anthore, A., Aassime, A., Cavanna, A., Gennser, U., Pierre, F.: Transmitting

the quantum state of electrons across a metallic island with Coulomb interaction. Science 366(6470),

1243–1247 (2019). doi:10.1126/science.aaw7856

[45] Ladd, T.D., Jelezko, F., Laﬂamme, R., Nakamura, Y., Monroe, C., O’Brien, J.L.: Quantum computers.

Nature 464, 45–53 (2010). doi:10.1038/nature08812

[46] Popkin, G.: Scientists are close to building a quantum computer that can beat a conventional one. Science

(2016). doi:10.1126/science.aal0442

[47] Kjaergaard, M., Schwartz, M.E., Braum¨uller, J., Krantz, P., Wang, J.I.-J., Gustavsson, S., Oliver, W.D.:

Superconducting Qubits: Current State of Play. Annual Review of Condensed Matter Physics 11(1), 369–

395 (2020). doi:10.1146/annurev-conmatphys-031119-050605. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-conmatphys-

031119-050605

25

[48] Bruzewicz, C.D., Chiaverini, J., McConnell, R., Sage, J.M.: Trapped-ion quantum comput-

ing: Progress and challenges. Applied Physics Reviews 6(2), 021314 (2019). doi:10.1063/1.5088164.

https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5088164

[49] Stano, P., Loss, D.: Review of performance metrics of spin qubits in gated semiconducting nanostructures.

arXiv:2107.06485 (2021)

[50] UltraFastNano: Electronic generation and detection in nanoelectronic devices at the picosecond scale

(2020). https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/862683

[51] Niimi, Y., Baines, Y., Capron, T., Mailly, D., Lo, F.-Y., Wieck, A.D., Meunier, T., Saminadayar, L.,

B¨auerle, C.: Eﬀect of disorder on the quantum coherence in mesoscopic wires. Phys. Rev. Lett. 102,

226801 (2009). doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.102.226801

[52] Niimi, Y., Baines, Y., Capron, T., Mailly, D., Lo, F.-Y., Wieck, A.D., Meunier, T., Saminadayar, L.,

B¨auerle, C.: Quantum coherence at low temperatures in mesoscopic systems: Eﬀect of disorder. Phys.

Rev. B 81, 245306 (2010). doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.81.245306

[53] Roussely, G., Arrighi, E., Georgiou, G., Takada, S., Schalk, M., Urdampilleta, M., Ludwig, A., Wieck,

A.D., Armagnat, P., Kloss, T., Waintal, X., Meunier, T., B¨auerle, C.: Unveiling the bosonic nature of an

ultrashort few-electron pulse. Nat. Commun. 9, 2811 (2018). doi:10.1038/s41467-018-05203-7

[54] Bocquillon, E., Freulon, V., Berroir, J.-M., Degiovanni, P., Pla¸cais, B., Cavanna, A., Jin, Y., F`eve,

G.: Coherence and Indistinguishability of Single Electrons Emitted by Independent Sources. Science

339(6123), 1054–1057 (2013). doi:10.1126/science.1232572

[55] Thomas, C., Hatke, A.T., Tuaz, A., Kallaher, R., Wu, T., Wang, T., Diaz, R.E., Gardner, G.C., Capano,

M.A., Manfra, M.J.: High-mobility InAs 2DEGs on GaSb substrates: A platform for mesoscopic quantum

transport. Phys. Rev. Materials 2, 104602 (2018). doi:10.1103/PhysRevMaterials.2.104602

[56] Chung, Y.J., Villegas Rosales, K.A., Baldwin, K.W., Madathil, P.T., West, K.W., Shayegan, M., Pfeif-

fer, L.N.: Ultra-high-quality two-dimensional electron systems. Nature Materials 20(5), 632–637 (2021).

doi:10.1038/s41563-021-00942-3

[57] Talyanskii, V.I., Shilton, J.M., Pepper, M., Smith, C.G., Ford, C.J.B., Linﬁeld, E.H., Ritchie, D.A., Jones,

G.A.C.: Single-electron transport in a one-dimensional channel by high-frequency surface acoustic waves.

Phys. Rev. B 56, 15180–15184 (1997). doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.56.15180

[58] Kaestner, B., Kashcheyevs, V., Amakawa, S., Blumenthal, M.D., Li, L., Janssen, T.J.B.M., Hein, G.,

Pierz, K., Weimann, T., Siegner, U., Schumacher, H.W.: Single-parameter nonadiabatic quantized charge

pumping. Phys. Rev. B 77, 153301 (2008). doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.77.153301

[59] Yamahata, G., Giblin, S.P., Kataoka, M., Karasawa, T., Fujiwara, A.: High-accuracy current generation

in the nanoampere regime from a silicon single-trap electron pump. Scientiﬁc Reports 7(1), 45137 (2017).

doi:10.1038/srep45137

26

[60] Kaestner, B., Kashcheyevs, V.: Non-adiabatic quantized charge pumping with tunable-barrier quantum

dots: a review of current progress. Reports on Progress in Physics 78(10), 103901 (2015). doi:10.1088/0034-

4885/78/10/103901

[61] Jullien, T., Roulleau, P., Roche, B., Cavanna, A., Jin, Y., Glattli, D.C.: Quantum tomography of an

electron. Nature 514, 603 (2014)

[62] Bisognin, R., Marguerite, A., Roussel, B., Kumar, M., Cabart, C., Chapdelaine, C., Mohammad-Djafari,

A., Berroir, J.-M., Bocquillon, E., Pla¸cais, B., Cavanna, A., Gennser, U., Jin, Y., Degiovanni, P., F`eve, G.:

Quantum tomography of electrical currents. Nature Communications 10, 3379 (2019). doi:10.1038/s41467-

019-11369-5

[63] Wixforth, A., Kotthaus, J.P., Weimann, G.: Quantum Oscillations in the Surface-Acoustic-Wave Atten-

uation Caused by a Two-Dimensional Electron System. Physical Review Letters 56, 2104–2106 (1986).

doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.56.2104

[64] Morgan, D.: Surface Acoustic Wave Filters: With Applications to Electronic Communications and Signal

Processing, 2nd edn. Academic Press, Oxford (2007)

[65] de Lima, M.M., Santos, P.V.: Modulation of photonic structures by surface acoustic waves. Reports on

Progress in Physics 68(7), 1639–1701 (2005). doi:10.1088/0034-4885/68/7/r02

[66] Kataoka, M., Astley, M.R., Thorn, A.L., Oi, D.K.L., Barnes, C.H.W., Ford, C.J.B., Anderson, D., Jones,

G.A.C., Farrer, I., Ritchie, D.A., Pepper, M.: Coherent Time Evolution of a Single-Electron Wave Func-

tion. Physical Review Letters 102, 156801 (2009). doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.102.156801

[67] Ito, R., Takada, S., Ludwig, A., Wieck, A.D., Tarucha, S., Yamamoto, M.: Coherent Beam Split-

ting of Flying Electrons Driven by a Surface Acoustic Wave. Phys. Rev. Lett. 126, 070501 (2021).

doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.126.070501

[68] Edlbauer, H., Wang, J., Ota, S., Richard, A., Jadot, B., Mortemousque, P.-A., Okazaki, Y., Nakamura,

S., Kodera, T., Kaneko, N.-H., Ludwig, A., Wieck, A.D., Urdampilleta, M., Meunier, T., B¨auerle, C.,

Takada, S.: In-ﬂight distribution of an electron within a surface acoustic wave. Appl. Phys. Lett. 119(11),

114004 (2021). doi:10.1063/5.0062491

[69] Jadot, B., Mortemousque, P.-A., Chanrion, E., Thiney, V., Ludwig, A., Wieck, A.D., Urdampilleta,

M., B¨auerle, C., Meunier, T.: Distant spin entanglement via fast and coherent electron shuttling. Nat.

Nanotechnol. 16(5), 570–575 (2021). doi:10.1038/s41565-021-00846-y

[70] Taubert, D., Schinner, G.J., Tranitz, H.P., Wegscheider, W., Tomaras, C., Kehrein, S., Ludwig, S.:

Electron-avalanche ampliﬁer based on the electronic venturi eﬀect. Phys. Rev. B 82, 161416 (2010).

doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.82.161416

[71] Taubert, D., Tomaras, C., Schinner, G.J., Tranitz, H.P., Wegscheider, W., Kehrein, S., Ludwig, S.:

Relaxation of hot electrons in a degenerate two-dimensional electron system: Transition to one-dimensional

scattering. Phys. Rev. B 83, 235404 (2011). doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.83.235404

27

[72] Fletcher, J.D., See, P., Howe, H., Pepper, M., Giblin, S.P., Griﬃths, J.P., Jones, G.A.C., Farrer, I., Ritchie,

D.A., Janssen, T.J.B.M., Kataoka, M.: Clock-Controlled Emission of Single-Electron Wave Packets in a

Solid-State Circuit. Phys. Rev. Lett. 111(21), 216807 (2013). doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.111.216807

[73] Emary, C., Dyson, A., Ryu, S., Sim, H.-S., Kataoka, M.: Phonon emission and arrival times of electrons

from a single-electron source. Phys. Rev. B 93(3), 035436 (2016). doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.93.035436

[74] Emary, C., Clark, L.A., Kataoka, M., Johnson, N.: Energy relaxation in hot electron quan-

tum optics via acoustic and optical phonon emission. Phys. Rev. B 99(4), 045306 (2019).

doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.99.045306

[75] Johnson, N., Emary, C., Ryu, S., Sim, H.-S., See, P., Fletcher, J.D., Griﬃths, J.P., Jones, G.A.C.,

Farrer, I., Ritchie, D.A., Pepper, M., Janssen, T.J.B.M., Kataoka, M.: LO-Phonon Emission Rate of Hot

Electrons from an On-Demand Single-Electron Source in a GaAs/AlGaAs Heterostructure. Phys. Rev.

Lett. 121(13), 137703 (2018). doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.121.137703

[76] Ota, T., Akiyama, S., Hashisaka, M., Muraki, K., Fujisawa, T.: Spectroscopic study on hot-electron trans-

port in a quantum hall edge channel. Phys. Rev. B 99, 085310 (2019). doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.99.085310

[77] Heiblum, M., Nathan, M.I., Thomas, D.C., Knoedler, C.M.: Direct observation of ballistic transport in

gaas. Phys. Rev. Lett. 55, 2200–2203 (1985). doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.55.2200

[78] Akiyama, S., Hirasawa, T., Sato, Y., Akiho, T., Muraki, K., Fujisawa, T.: Ballistic hot-electron transport

in a quantum Hall edge channel deﬁned by a double gate. Applied Physics Letters 115(24), 243106 (2019).

doi:10.1063/1.5126776. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5126776

[79] Kataoka, M., Johnson, N., Emary, C., See, P., Griﬃths, J.P., Jones, G.A.C., Farrer, I., Ritchie, D.A., Pep-

per, M., Janssen, T.J.B.M.: Time-of-Flight Measurements of Single-Electron Wave Packets in Quantum

Hall Edge States. Phys. Rev. Lett. 116(12), 126803 (2016). doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.126803

[80] Waldie, J., See, P., Kashcheyevs, V., Griﬃths, J.P., Farrer, I., Jones, G.A.C., Ritchie, D.A., Janssen,

T.J.B.M., Kataoka, M.: Measurement and control of electron wave packets from a single-electron source.

Phys. Rev. B 92(12), 125305 (2015). doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.92.125305

[81] Kataoka, M., Fletcher, J.D., Johnson, N.: Time-resolved single-electron wave-packet detection. Phys.

Status Solidi B 254(3), 1600547 (2017). doi:10.1002/pssb.201600547

[82] Fletcher, J.D., Johnson, N., Locane, E., See, P., Griﬃths, J.P., Farrer, I., Ritchie, D.A., Brouwer, P.W.,

Kashcheyevs, V., Kataoka, M.: Continuous-variable tomography of solitary electrons. Nat. Commun.

10(5298), 1–7 (2019). doi:10.1038/s41467-019-13222-1

[83] Locane, E., Brouwer, P.W., Kashcheyevs, V.: Time-energy ﬁltering of single electrons in ballistic waveg-

uides. New J. Phys. 21, 093042 (2019). doi:10.1088/1367-2630/ab3fbb

[84] Ryu, S., Kataoka, M., Sim, H.-S.: Ultrafast Emission and Detection of a Single-Electron

Gaussian Wave Packet:

A Theoretical Study. Phys. Rev. Lett. 117(14),

146802 (2016).

doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.117.146802

28

[85] Ubbelohde, N., Hohls, F., Kashcheyevs, V., Wagner, T., Fricke, L., K¨astner, B., Pierz, K., Schumacher,

H.W., Haug, R.J.: Partitioning of on-demand electron pairs. Nat. Nanotechnol. 10(1), 46–49 (2015).

doi:10.1038/nnano.2014.275

[86] Fricke, L., Wulf, M., Kaestner, B., Kashcheyevs, V., Timoshenko, J., Nazarov, P., Hohls, F., Mirovsky, P.,

Mackrodt, B., Dolata, R., Weimann, T., Pierz, K., Schumacher, H.W.: Counting statistics for electron cap-

ture in a dynamic quantum dot. Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 126803 (2013). doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.110.126803

[87] Schulenborg, J., Saptsov, R.B., Haupt, F., Splettstoesser, J., Wegewijs, M.R.: Fermion-parity

duality and energy relaxation in interacting open systems. Phys. Rev. B 93(8), 081411 (2016).

doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.93.081411

[88] Schulenborg, J., Splettstoesser, J., Wegewijs, M.R.: Duality for open fermion systems: Energy-

dependent weak coupling and quantum master equations. Phys. Rev. B 98(23), 235405 (2018).

doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.98.235405

[89] Schulenborg, J., Splettstoesser, J., Governale, M., Contreras-Pulido, L.D.: Detection of the relaxation

rates of an interacting quantum dot by a capacitively coupled sensor dot. Phys. Rev. B 89(19), 195305

(2014). doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.89.195305

[90] Riwar, R.-P., Roche, B., Jehl, X., Splettstoesser, J.: Readout of relaxation rates by nonadiabatic pumping

spectroscopy. Phys. Rev. B 93(23), 235401 (2016). doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.93.235401

[91] Clark, L.A., Kataoka, M., Emary, C.: Mitigating decoherence in hot electron interferometry. New J. Phys.

22(10), 103031 (2020). doi:10.1088/1367-2630/abb9e5

[92] Barratt, C.J., Ryu, S., Clark, L.A., Sim, H.-S., Kataoka, M., Emary, C.: Phase averaging and arrival

times in a hot-electron Mach-Zehnder interferometer. arXiv:2104.01653 (2021)

[93] Haack, G., Moskalets, M., Splettstoesser, J., B¨uttiker, M.: Coherence of single-electron sources from

Mach-Zehnder interferometry. Phys. Rev. B 84(8), 081303 (2011). doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.84.081303

[94] Juergens, S., Splettstoesser, J., Moskalets, M.: Single-particle interference versus two-particle collisions.

EPL 96(3), 37011 (2011). doi:10.1209/0295-5075/96/37011

[95] Splettstoesser, J., Moskalets, M., B¨uttiker, M.: Two-Particle Nonlocal Aharonov-Bohm Eﬀect from Two

Single-Particle Emitters. Phys. Rev. Lett. 103(7), 076804 (2009). doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.103.076804

[96] Johnson, N., Fletcher, J.D., Humphreys, D.A., See, P., Griﬃths, J.P., Jones, G.A.C., Farrer, I., Ritchie,

D.A., Pepper, M., Janssen, T.J.B.M., Kataoka, M.: Ultrafast voltage sampling using single-electron

wavepackets. Appl. Phys. Lett. 110(10), 102105 (2017). doi:10.1063/1.4978388

[97] Levitov, L.S., Lee, H., Lesovik, G.B.: Electron counting statistics and coherent states of electric current.

Journal of Mathematical Physics 37(10), 4845–4866 (1996). doi:10.1063/1.531672

[98] Ivanov, D.A., Lee, H.W., Levitov, L.S.: Coherent states of alternating current. Phys. Rev. B 56, 6839–6850

(1997). doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.56.6839

29

[99] Keeling, J., Klich, I., Levitov, L.S.: Minimal Excitation States of Electrons in One-Dimensional Wires.

Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 116403 (2006). doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.97.116403

[100] Grenier, C., Dubois, J., Jullien, T., Roulleau, P., Glattli, D.C., Degiovanni, P.: Fractionalization

of minimal excitations in integer quantum Hall edge channels. Phys. Rev. B 88, 085302 (2013).

doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.88.085302

[101] Moskalets, M.: First-order correlation function of a stream of single-electron wave packets. Phys. Rev. B

91, 195431 (2015). doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.91.195431

[102] Glattli, D.C., Roulleau, P.: Hanbury-Brown Twiss noise correlation with time controlled quasi-particles

in ballistic quantum conductors. Physica E: Low-dimensional Systems and Nanostructures 76, 216–222

(2016). doi:10.1016/j.physe.2015.10.034

[103] Ferraro, D., Ronetti, F., Vannucci, L., Acciai, M., Rech, J., Jockheere, T., Martin, T., Sassetti, M.:

Hong-Ou-Mandel characterization of multiply charged Levitons. The European Physical Journal Special

Topics 227(12), 1345–1359 (2018). doi:10.1140/epjst/e2018-800074-1

[104] Vanevi´c, M., Gabelli, J., Belzig, W., Reulet, B.: Electron and electron-hole quasiparticle states in a driven

quantum contact. Phys. Rev. B 93, 041416 (2016). doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.93.041416

[105] Yin, Y.: Quasiparticle states of on-demand coherent electron sources. Journal of Physics: Condensed

Matter 31(24), 245301 (2019). doi:10.1088/1361-648x/ab0fc4

[106] Kotilahti, J., Burset, P., Moskalets, M., Flindt, C.: Multi-Particle Interference in an Electronic Mach—

Zehnder Interferometer. Entropy 23(6) (2021). doi:10.3390/e23060736

[107] Grenier, C., Herv´e, R., Bocquillon, E., Parmentier, F.D., Pla¸cais, B., Berroir, J.M., F`eve, G., Degiovanni,

P.: Single-electron quantum tomography in quantum Hall edge channels. New Journal of Physics 13(9),

093007 (2011). doi:10.1088/1367-2630/13/9/093007

[108] Roussel, B., Cabart, C., F`eve, G., Degiovanni, P.: Processing Quantum Signals Carried by Electrical

Currents. PRX Quantum 2, 020314 (2021). doi:10.1103/PRXQuantum.2.020314

[109] Ferraro, D., Feller, A., Ghibaudo, A., Thibierge, E., Bocquillon, E., F`eve, G., Grenier, C., Degiovanni, P.:

Wigner function approach to single electron coherence in quantum Hall edge channels. Phys. Rev. B 88,

205303 (2013). doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.88.205303

[110] Ferraro, D., Roussel, B., Cabart, C., Thibierge, E., F`eve, G., Grenier, C., Degiovanni, P.: Real-Time

Decoherence of Landau and Levitov Quasiparticles in Quantum Hall Edge Channels. Phys. Rev. Lett.

113, 166403 (2014). doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.113.166403

[111] Cabart, C., Roussel, B., F`eve, G., Degiovanni, P.: Taming electronic decoherence in one-dimensional

chiral ballistic quantum conductors. Phys. Rev. B 98, 155302 (2018). doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.98.155302

[112] Rebora, G., Acciai, M., Ferraro, D., Sassetti, M.: Collisional interferometry of levitons in quantum Hall

edge channels at ν = 2. Phys. Rev. B 101, 245310 (2020). doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.101.245310

30

[113] Wahl, C., Rech,

J.,

Jonckheere, T., Martin, T.:

Interactions and Charge Fractionaliza-

tion in an Electronic Hong-Ou-Mandel

Interferometer. Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 046802 (2014).

doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.112.046802

[114] Freulon, V., Marguerite, A., Berroir, J.-M., Pla¸cais, B., Cavanna, A., Jin, Y., F`eve, G.: Hong-Ou-Mandel

experiment for temporal investigation of single-electron fractionalization. Nature communications 6, 6854

(2015)

[115] Marguerite, A., Cabart, C., Wahl, C., Roussel, B., Freulon, V., Ferraro, D., Grenier, C., Berroir, J.-

M., Pla¸cais, B., Jonckheere, T., Rech, J., Martin, T., Degiovanni, P., Cavanna, A., Jin, Y., F`eve, G.:

Decoherence and relaxation of a single electron in a one-dimensional conductor. Phys. Rev. B 94, 115311

(2016). doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.94.115311

[116] Auston, D.H.: Picosecond optoelectronic switching and gating in silicon. Applied Physics Letters 26(3),

101–103 (1975). doi:10.1063/1.88079

[117] Mourou, G., Stancampiano, C.V., Blumenthal, D.: Picosecond microwave pulse generation. Applied

Physics Letters 38(6), 470–472 (1981). doi:10.1063/1.92407

[118] Auston, D.H., Cheung, K.P., Smith, P.R.: Picosecond photoconducting hertzian dipoles. Applied Physics

Letters 45(3), 284–286 (1984). doi:10.1063/1.95174

[119] Heshmat, B., Pahlevaninezhad, H., Pang, Y., Masnadi-Shirazi, M., Burton Lewis, R., Tiedje, T., Gordon,

R., Darcie, T.E.: Nanoplasmonic terahertz photoconductive switch on gaas. Nano letters 12(12), 6255–

6259 (2012). doi:10.1021/nl303314a

[120] Georgiou, G., Geﬀroy, C., B¨auerle, C., Roux, J.-F.: Eﬃcient Three-Dimensional Photonic—

Plasmonic Photoconductive Switches for Picosecond THz Pulses. ACS Photonics 7(6), 1444–1451 (2020).

doi:10.1021/acsphotonics.0c00044

[121] Roulleau, P., Portier, F., Glattli, D.C., Roche, P., Cavanna, A., Faini, G., Gennser, U., Mailly, D.:

Finite bias visibility of the electronic Mach-Zehnder interferometer. Physical Review B 76(16) (2007).

doi:10.1103/physrevb.76.161309

[122] Neder, I., Ofek, N., Chung, Y., Heiblum, M., Mahalu, D., Umansky, V.: Interference between two indis-

tinguishable electrons from independent sources. Nature 448, 333 (2007)

[123] Forrester, D.M., Kusmartsev, F.V.: Graphene levitons and anti-levitons in magnetic ﬁelds. Nanoscale 6,

7594–7603 (2014). doi:10.1039/C4NR00754A

[124] Forrester, D.M.: Conﬁnement eﬀects of levitons in a graphene cosmology laboratory. RSC Adv. 5, 5442–

5449 (2015). doi:10.1039/C4RA11227J

[125] Thalineau, R., Wieck, A.D., B¨auerle, C., Meunier, T.: Using a two-electron spin qubit to detect electrons

ﬂying above the Fermi sea. arXiv:1403.7770 (2014)

[126] Meunier, T. private communication

31

[127] Glattli, D.C., Nath, J., Taktak, I., Roulleau, P., B¨auerle, C., Waintal, X.: Design of a Single-Shot Electron

detector with sub-electron sensitivity for electron ﬂying qubit operation (2020). https://arxiv.org/abs/

2002.03947

[128] Ionicioiu, R., Amaratunga, G., Udrea, F.: Quantum Computation with ballistic electrons. International

Journal of Modern Physics B 15(2), 125–133 (2001)

[129] Bertoni, A., Bordone, P., Brunetti, R., Jacoboni, C., Reggiani, S.: Quantum Logic Gates based

on Coherent Electron Transport

in Quantum Wires. Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 5912–5915 (2000).

doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.84.5912

[130] Ionicioiu, R., Zanardi, P., Rossi, F.: Testing Bell’s inequality with ballistic electrons in semiconductors.

Phys. Rev. A 63, 050101 (2001). doi:10.1103/PhysRevA.63.050101

[131] Slussarenko, S., Pryde, G.J.: Photonic quantum information processing: A concise review. Applied Physics

Reviews 6(4), 041303 (2019). doi:10.1063/1.5115814

[132] Reiher, M., Wiebe, N., Svore, K.M., Wecker, D., Troyer, M.: Elucidating reaction mechanisms on

quantum computers. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 114(29), 7555–7560 (2017).

doi:10.1073/pnas.1619152114

[133] Zhou, Y., Stoudenmire, E.M., Waintal, X.: What Limits the Simulation of Quantum Computers? Phys.

Rev. X 10, 041038 (2020). doi:10.1103/PhysRevX.10.041038

[134] Takeda, S., Furusawa, A.: Universal Quantum Computing with Measurement-Induced Continuous-

Variable Gate Sequence in a Loop-Based Architecture. Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 120504 (2017).

doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.119.120504

[135] Waintal, X.: What determines the ultimate precision of a quantum computer. Phys. Rev. A 99, 042318

(2019). doi:10.1103/PhysRevA.99.042318

[136] Glattli, D.C., Andrei, E.Y., Deville, G., Poitrenaud, J., Williams, F.I.B.: Dynamical hall eﬀect in a two-

dimensional classical plasma. Phys. Rev. Lett. 54, 1710–1713 (1985). doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.54.1710

[137] Mast, D.B., Dahm, A.J., Fetter, A.L.: Observation of bulk and edge magnetoplasmons in a two-

dimensional electron ﬂuid. Phys. Rev. Lett. 54, 1706–1709 (1985). doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.54.1706

[138] Dahm, A.J., Vinen, W.F.: Electrons and ions at the helium surface. Physics Today 40(2), 43–50 (1987).

doi:10.1063/1.881098

[139] Byeon, H., Nasyedkin, K., Lane, J.R., Beysengulov, N.R., Zhang, L., Loloee, R., Pollanen, J.: Piezoa-

coustics for precision control of electrons ﬂoating on helium. Nature Communications 12(1), 4150 (2021).

doi:10.1038/s41467-021-24452-7

[140] Zhou, X., Koolstra, G., Zhang, X., Yang, G., Han, X., Dizdar, B., Li, X., Divan, R., Guo, W., Murch,

K.W., Schuster, D.I., Jin, D.: Single electrons on solid neon as a solid-state qubit platform. Nature

605(7908), 46–50 (2022). doi:10.1038/s41586-022-04539-x

32

[141] Chatterjee, A., Stevenson, P., De Franceschi, S., Morello, A., de Leon, N.P., Kuemmeth, F.: Semiconduc-

tor qubits in practice. Nature Reviews Physics 3(3), 157–177 (2021). doi:10.1038/s42254-021-00283-9

[142] Trellakis, A., Zibold, T., Andlauer, T., Birner, S., Smith, R.K., Morschl, R., Vogl, P.: The 3D nanome-

ter device project nextnano: Concepts, methods, results. J. Comput. Electron. 5(4), 285–289 (2006).

doi:10.1007/s10825-006-0005-x

[143] Groth, C.W., Wimmer, M., Akhmerov, A.R., Waintal, X.: Kwant: a software package for quantum

transport. New Journal of Physics 16(6), 063065 (2014). doi:10.1088/1367-2630/16/6/063065

[144] Kloss, T., Weston, J., Gaury, B., Rossignol, B., Groth, C., Waintal, X.: Tkwant: a software package

for time-dependent quantum transport. New Journal of Physics 23(2), 023025 (2021). doi:10.1088/1367-

2630/abddf7

[145] Bautze, T., S¨ussmeier, C., Takada, S., Groth, C., Meunier, T., Yamamoto, M., Tarucha, S., Waintal, X.,

B¨auerle, C.: Theoretical, numerical, and experimental study of a ﬂying qubit electronic interferometer.

Phys. Rev. B 89, 125432 (2014). doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.89.125432

[146] Weston, J., Waintal, X.: Towards realistic time-resolved simulations of quantum devices. J. Comput.

Electron. 15(4), 102105 (1148–1157). doi:10.1007/s10825-016-0855-9

[147] Rossignol, B., Kloss, T., Armagnat, P., Waintal, X.: Toward ﬂying qubit spectroscopy. Phys. Rev. B 98,

205302 (2018). doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.98.205302

[148] Datta, S.: Quantum Transport: Atom to Transistor. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (2005).

doi:10.1017/CBO9781139164313

[149] Birner, S., Schindler, C., Greck, P., Sabathil, M., Vogl, P.: Ballistic quantum transport using the contact

block reduction (CBR) method. J Comput Electron 8, 267–286 (2009). doi:10.1007/s10825-009-0293-z

[150] Trellakis, A., Galick, A.T., Pacelli, A., Ravaioli, U.:

Iteration scheme for the solution of the two-

dimensional Schr¨odinger-Poisson equations in quantum structures. J. Appl. Phys. 81(12), 7880–7884

(1997). doi:10.1063/1.365396

[151] Armagnat, P., Lacerda-Santos, A., Rossignol, B., Groth, C., Waintal, X.:

The

self-

consistent quantum-electrostatic problem in strongly non-linear regime. SciPost Phys. 7, 31 (2019).

doi:10.21468/SciPostPhys.7.3.031

[152] Grange, T., Stark, D., Scalari, G., Faist, J., Persichetti, L., Di Gaspare, L., De Seta, M., Ortolani,

M., Paul, D.J., Capellini, G., Birner, S., Virgilio, M.: Room temperature operation of n-type Ge/SiGe

terahertz quantum cascade lasers predicted by non-equilibrium Green’s functions. Applied Physics Letters

114(11), 111102 (2019). doi:10.1063/1.5082172. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5082172

[153] Mamaluy, D., Sabathil, M., Vogl, P.: Eﬃcient method for the calculation of ballistic quantum transport.

Journal of Applied Physics 93, 4628 (2003). doi:10.1063/1.1560567

[154] Birner, S., Hackenbuchner, S., Sabathil, M., Zandler, G., Majewski, J., Andlauer, T., Zibold, T., Morschl,

R., Trellakis, A., Vogl, P.: Modeling of Semiconductor Nanostructures with nextnano3. Acta Physica

Polonica A 110, 111–124 (2006). doi:10.12693/APhysPolA.110.111

33

[155] Birner, S., Zibold, T., Andlauer, T., Kubis, T., Sabathil, M., Trellakis, A., Vogl, P.: nextnano:

General Purpose 3-D Simulations. IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices 54, 2137–2142 (2007).

doi:10.1109/TED.2007.902871

[156] Zibold, T., Vogl, P., Bertoni, A.: Theory of semiconductor quantum-wire-based single- and two-qubit

gates. Phys. Rev. B 76, 195301 (2007). doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.76.195301

[157] Caﬂisch, R.E., Gyure, M.F., Robinson, H.D., Yablonovitch, E.: Modeling, Design, and Optimization of a

Solid State Electron Spin Qubit. SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics 65(4), 1285–1304 (2005)

[158] Wild, A., Sailer, J., N¨utzel, J., Abstreiter, G., Ludwig, S., Bougeard, D.: Electrostatically deﬁned quantum

dots in a Si/SiGe heterostructure. New Journal of Physics 12(11), 113019 (2010). doi:10.1088/1367-

2630/12/11/113019

[159] Ramirez, E.B., Sﬁgakis, F., Kudva, S., Baugh, J.: Few-electrode design for silicon MOS quantum dots.

Semiconductor Science and Technology 35(1), 015002 (2019). doi:10.1088/1361-6641/ab516a

[160] Buonacorsi, B., Shaw, B., Baugh, J.: Simulated coherent electron shuttling in silicon quantum dots. Phys.

Rev. B 102, 125406 (2020). doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.102.125406

[161] Jirovec, D., Hofmann, A., Ballabio, A., Mutter, P.M., Tavani, G., Botifoll, M., Crippa, A., Kukucka, J.,

Sagi, O., Martins, F., et al.: A singlet-triplet hole spin qubit in planar ge. Nature Materials, 1–7 (2021)

[162] Chatzikyriakou, E., Wang, J., Mazzella, L., Lacerda-Santos, A., Figueira, M.C.d.S., Trellakis, A., Birner,

S., Grange, T., B¨auerle, C., Waintal, X.: Unveiling the charge distribution of a GaAs-based nanoelectronic

device: A large experimental data-set approach. arXiv (2022). https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.00846

[163] Hou, H., Chung, Y., Rughoobur, G., Hsiao, T.K., Nasir, A., Flewitt, A.J., Griﬃths, J.P., Farrer, I., Ritchie,

D.A., Ford, C.J.B.: Experimental veriﬁcation of electrostatic boundary conditions in gate-patterned quan-

tum devices. Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 51(24), 244004 (2018)

[164] Wang, J.: nextnanopy (2021). https://github.com/nextnanopy Accessed 2021-08-03

[165] Datta, S., Melloch, M.R., Bandyopadhyay, S., Lundstrom, M.S.: Proposed structure for large quantum

interference eﬀects. Appl. Phys. Lett. 48(7), 487–489 (1986). doi:10.1063/1.96484

[166] Gaury, B., Weston, J., Santin, M., Houzet, M., Groth, C., Waintal, X.: Numerical simulations of time-

resolved quantum electronics. Physics Reports 534(1), 1–37 (2014). doi:10.1016/j.physrep.2013.09.001.

Numerical simulations of time-resolved quantum electronics

[167] Gaury, B., Weston, J., Waintal, X.: Stopping electrons with radio-frequency pulses in the quantum hall

regime. Phys. Rev. B 90, 161305 (2014). doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.90.161305

[168] Maˇcek, M., Dumitrescu, P.T., Bertrand, C., Triggs, B., Parcollet, O., Waintal, X.: Quantum Quasi-

Monte Carlo Technique for Many-Body Perturbative Expansions. Phys. Rev. Lett. 125, 047702 (2020).

doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.125.047702

[169] Lepeshov, S., Gorodetsky, A., Krasnok, A., Rafailov, E., Belov, P.: Enhancement of terahertz photocon-

ductive antenna operation by optical nanoantennas. Laser & Photonics Reviews 11(1), 1600199 (2017).

doi:10.1002/lpor.201600199

34

[170] Bashirpour, M., Ghorbani, S., Kolahdouz, M., Neshat, M., Masnadi-Shirazi, M., Aghababa, H.: Signiﬁcant

performance improvement of a terahertz photoconductive antenna using a hybrid structure. RSC Adv. 7,

53010–53017 (2017). doi:10.1039/C7RA11398F

35

Figures

Figure 1: Electron ﬂying qubit. (a) Bloch sphere showing the qubit state ψ that is deﬁned via the tunnel-

coupling θ and the phase shift φ. (b) Schematic of an electron two-path interferometer allowing precise ad-

justment of the qubit state via tunnel-coupling (∆θ) and the quantum phase (∆φ) picked up along transport

across the central island. (c) Transverse potential landscape across the tunnel-coupling region with schematic

indications of the qubit basis 0 and 1. (d) Detailed 3D geometry of a quantum interferometer showing surface-

gates (golden) deﬁning the potential landscape and thus the transport paths in the two-dimensional electron

gas (2DEG) located below the surface. The white crossed boxes indicate ohmic contacts enabling electrical

connection to the 2DEG. (e) Measurement of quantum oscillations as function of a perpendicular magnetic

ﬁeld B and the side-gate voltage VG. Data adapted from Ref. 42.

36

Figure 2: SAW-driven single-electron transport through a tunnel-coupled wire (TCW). (a) Schematic show-

ing an interdigital transducer launching a surface acoustic wave (SAW) towards the circuit consisting of a pair

of tunnel-coupled transport paths whose ends are equipped with QDs to send and catch a single electron. (b)

Scanning electron micrograph of the source quantum dot (QD) with schematic indications of the QPC sensor

and the pulsing gate. (c) Measurement of the single-shot transfer probability P as function of potential detuning

∆. The solid line shows the result of a simplistic one-dimensional simulation assuming charge excitation in the

TCW. (d) Schematic showing vertical potential cuts in the tunnel-coupled wire (TCW) for diﬀerent potential

detuning ∆. (e) Time-dependent simulation of SAW-driven electron propagation through the tunnel-coupled

wire (TCW) at ∆ = 0 for peak-to-peak SAW modulation amplitudes of A = 17 meV and A = 45 meV. The

grey regions indicate the surface gates. The data shows the evolution of the single-electron wave function ψ for

diﬀerent time frames t indicated via the vertical dashed lines. Adapted from Ref. 31.

37

Figure 3: Hot-electron emission and transport. (a) A false-colour SEM image of a hot-electron time-of-ﬂight

measurement device 79. The red and blue arrows show two paths taken by the electrons emitted by a quantum-

dot pump at the left. The diﬀerence in arrival times from the two paths are used to estimate the drift velocity.

The two-dimensional electron gas in the paths are depleted by a surface gate. (b) A schematic of Landau levels

near the edge where the two-dimensional electron gas is depleted. “Usual” edge states forming near the Fermi

energy are indicated by black circles. The high-energy states where hot electrons travel are indicated by a red

circle. (c) Energy diagram of hot-electron emission from an electron pump (blue-coloured potential on the left)

and its detection by energy-dependent barrier (red-coloured potential on the right). (d) The determination of

the electron emission energy E1 by the measurement of transmitted current as a function of the detector barrier

height 72. f is the operating frequency of the electron pump.

Figure 4: Hot-electron quasiprobability distribution. Wigner quasiprobability distribution (a map to visualise

the particle’s state in phase space by translating the wave function) plotted on the energy (E)-time (t) phase

space using the time-dependent barrier described in Ref. 82. E0 and t0 are arbitrarily chosen central values

of the electron emission energy and arrival time. This plot shows that the quasi-probability distribution has

a correlation between energy and time, implying that the emission energy is lifted as the electron leaves the

source.

38

Figure 5: Levitons qubits. (a) Time trace of a Lorentzian voltage pulse that is suitable for excitation of Levitons.

(b) Excitation spectrum corresponding to this Lorentzian pulse showing the collective excitation of the single-

electron wave function without perturbation of the Fermi sea. (c) Scanning electron micrograph showing a

quantum interferometer with the two tunnel-coupled wires enclosing the island with schematic indication of the

paths of for transportation of the Levitons.

Figure 6: Scanning electron microscopy image of a multi-qubit ﬂying electron architecture.

The image shows four quantum interferometers that can be simultaneously operated owing to a common bridge

that connects the islands of each device. The dashed lines schematically indicate the paths of two Levitons in

two neighboring interferometers. The intermediate gate C (highlighted in yellow) allows for controlled Coulomb

coupling of the Levitons and thus in-ﬂight entanglement.

39

Figure 7: Architecture for a universal quantum computer using Levitons. The quantum switches (in brown)

send the qubits to the various quantum gates. Single qubit rotations Hadamard (H), two-qubit controlled-phase

(C-φ) and measurement along z (MZ) are implemented during the ﬂight.

Figure 8: Schematic of a full simulation stack for ﬂying qubits architectures

Figure 9: Schematic of the ideal workﬂow from the sample design to the device fabrication

40

StaticdevicesimulationsQuantum modelingQuantum transportTimeresolvedsimulations (smallcorrelations)ElectrostaticMany-body simulations (large correlations)Quantum computingsimulationsCalibration withexperiments. 1 eV1 meV0.1 meVTypicalenergyscalemodeledFigure 10: Calibration details. (a) Schematic of the GaAs/AlGaAs heterostructure below the surface-gate deﬁned

QPC (yellow) with indications on the surface charges (red circles), Si dopants (blue circles) and the 2DEG (red

line). (b) Scanning-electron-microscopy image of a QPC design. (c) Experimental current I across the narrow

constriction as a function of the surface-gate voltage VG. (d) Simulated distribution of the electron density n2DEG

for VG = −1.80 V using nextnano. The grey polygons correspond to the gate geometry. (e) Electron density n2DEG

along the constriction (y = 0; dashed line in (d) for three values of VG. (f) Electron density n2DEG below the surface

gate (black square) and at the middle of the constriction (red circle). The simulated QPC pinch-oﬀ occurs when the

2DEG is completely depleted.

41

500 nmVGVG(a)(b)(c)(d)(e)(f)ExperimentSimulationpinch-off voltagepinch-off voltagezxGaAs2DEGGaAsAlGaAsSi-AlGaAsAlGaAsGate voltage VG (V)Gate voltage VG (V)x (μm)x (μm)y (μm)Current I (nA)-1.60 V-2.00 VFigure 11: Electrostatic potential landscape. (a) Scanning electron micrograph of the entrance of a tunnel-

coupled region. Adapted from Ref. 31. (b) Electrostatic potential induced at the 2DEG from 3D simulations

using realistic gate geometries (fainted black layout) and typical voltage values applied to the electrostatic gates.

Equipotential lines are shown as continuous lines. Vertical cuts (blue and red) show the double-well potential

before and within the tunnel-coupled region. The black line represents the path which follows the minimum in

the potential landscape.

42

5002500250500x (nm)6004002000200400600y (nm)-0.88 V-0.74 V-0.88 V-0.74 V-1.10 V-1.05 V-1.05 V(b)5002500250500x (nm)50100150Energy (meV)0200Energy (meV)6004002000200400600y (nm)(a)200 nm0200Energy (meV)Figure 12: nextnano simulations of the electron partial local density of states in the tunnel-coupled

wire (TCW: panels (a-e)) and the TCW – Aharonov–Bohm interferometer – TCW nanodevice (TCW–AB–

TCW: panels (f-j)). Both devices are connected to four terminals (marked by white numbers). The background

shows the potential landscape deﬁned by the voltage on the surface gates, cf. Fig. 13(a,d). The electron with a

given energy (E = 9.2 meV for TCW and E = 7.5 meV for TCW–AB–TCW) is always injected into the upper

incoming channel from the 1st lead, |0(cid:105) state. The states at the output leads are indicated at the top of each

panel and explained in the main text. Panels (a-e): the pLDoS in TCW for increasing the tunneling barrier

voltage (described by VT). Panels (f-j): the pLDoS in TCW–AB–TCW for increasing voltage on a side gate of

the bottom path (described by Vg).

43

Figure 13: nextnano simulation of transmission for the tunnel-coupled wire (TCW: panels (a-c)) and

the TCW – Aharonov–Bohm interferometer – TCW nanodevice (TCW–AB–TCW: panels (d-f)). Both devices

are connected to four terminals (external leads marked by white numbers). Panels (a,d): Potential landscapes

of TCW and TCW–AB–TCW devices. Red and light blue separation regions denote impenetrable (very high

with the height V∞ = 10 eV) and penetrable (tunneling with the height VT) potential barriers, respectively.

Green regions mark those parts of the device where the gate voltages 0.5 eV and Vg are applied. Panels (b,e):

Energy-dependent transmission of the electron from the lead no. 1 into the leads no. 3 (T13) and no. 4 (T14).

Red dashed lines mark some electron energies where the reﬂection is almost absent, T13 + T14 (cid:39) 1 (E = 9.2 meV

for TCW and 7.5 meV for TCW–AB–TCW). Panels (c,f): Almost reﬂectionless transmission of the electron

with ﬁxed energy as a function of VT (TCW) and Vg (TCW–AB–TCW). Dots in panel (c) correspond to the

semi-phenomenological theory supplied by the 1D simulation of the spectrum at the center of the device, x = 0

(marked by the dashed line in panel (a)). Insets: The same dependence as in the main ﬁgures but for devices

with half length, where the accessible number of quantum oscillations is much smaller.

44

