Communication 
A Simplistic and Cost-Effective Design for Real-World Devel-
opment of an Ambient Assisted Living System for Fall Detec-
tion and Indoor Localization: Proof of Concept 

Nirmalya Thakur 1* and Chia Y. Han 2 

1  Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 

45221-0030, USA; thakurna@mail.uc.edu 

2  Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 

45221-0030, USA; han@ucmail.uc.edu 
*  Correspondence: thakurna@mail.uc.edu 

Abstract:  Falls,  highly  common  in the  constantly  increasing  global aging  population,  can  have a 
variety of negative effects on their health, well-being, and quality of life, including restricting their 
capabilities to  conduct  Activities  of  Daily  Living  (ADLs), which are  crucial  for  one’s  sustenance. 
Timely assistance during falls is highly necessary, which involves tracking the indoor location of 
the elderly during their diverse navigational patterns associated with ADLs to detect the precise 
location of a fall. With the decreasing caregiver population on a global scale, it is important that the 
future of intelligent living environments can detect falls during ADL.s while being able to track the 
indoor location of the elderly in the real world. Prior works in these fields have several limitations, 
such as – the lack of functionalities to detect both falls and indoor locations, high cost of implemen-
tation, complicated design, the requirement of multiple hardware components for deployment, and 
the necessity to develop new hardware for implementation, which make the wide-scale deployment 
of such technologies challenging. To address these challenges, this work proposes a  cost-effective 
and simplistic design paradigm for an Ambient Assisted Living system that can capture multimodal 
components  of  user  behaviors  during  ADLs  that are  necessary  for  performing  fall  detection  and 
indoor localization in a simultaneous manner in the real world. Proof of concept results from real-
world experiments are presented to uphold the effective working of the system. The findings from 
two comparison studies with prior works in this field are also presented to uphold the novelty of 
this work. The first comparison study shows how the proposed system outperforms prior works in 
the areas of indoor localization and fall detection in terms of the effectiveness of its software design 
and hardware design. The second comparison study shows that the cost for the development of this 
system is the least as compared to prior works in these fields, which involved real-world develop-
ment of the underlining systems, thereby upholding its cost-effective nature.   

Keywords: elderly; aging population; ambient intelligence; fall detection; indoor localization; real-
world implementation; sensors; activities of daily living; assisted living 

1. Introduction 

Growing worldwide longevity is now more commonplace than ever before, with the 
average life expectancy reaching 60 years or higher. This is mostly due to medical break-
throughs and advances in healthcare research [1]. The population of the world over the 
age of 65 is increasing dramatically, numbering 962 million today, and projected to in-
crease to 2 billion by 2050 [2,3]. As the population ages, modern society is facing a wide 
range of difficulties stemming from numerous conditions associated with the elderly, such 
as  varying  rates  of  decline  in  behavioral,  social,  emotional,  mental,  psychological,  and 
motor abilities, as well as other issues such as cognitive impairment, behavioral disorders, 

Citation:   

Academic Editor:   

Received:   

Accepted:   

Published:   

Publisher’s Note:   

Copyright:   

 
 
 
 
 
 
2  of  25 

disabilities, neurological disorders, Dementia, Alzheimer’s, and visual impairments, that 
are associated with the process of aging.   

Over the last few years, the aging populations throughout the globe have had to con-
tend with a decrease of caregivers to care for them, which has created a variety of chal-
lenges and difficulties [5-7]. Here, two of the key challenges will be discussed. First, as the 
demand has increased, the cost of caregiving has risen considerably in recent years. As a 
result, affording caregivers is becoming increasingly difficult. Second, quite often, care-
givers take care of multiple elderly people with multiple varying needs during a day; as 
a result, they are frequently exhausted, overworked, overwhelmed, and overburdened, 
which affects the quality of care. 

Research  predicts  that  the  worldwide  population  comprising  both  the  elderly  and 
the young will live in smart homes, smart communities, and smart cities in the coming 
years. Research by [8] estimates that 66 percent of the world’s population will live in smart 
homes  by  2050.  Thus,  due  to  the  scarcity  of  caregivers  and  the  expected  emergence  of 
smart homes on a global scale [9], the future of technology-driven Internet of Things (IoT)-
based living spaces, such as smart homes, must be able to contribute to Ambient Assisted 
Living (AAL) for the elderly by detecting, interpreting, analyzing, and anticipating differ-
ent needs within the context of their ADLs.   

AAL may broadly be defined as the use of networked, automated, and/or semi-auto-
mated  technological  solutions  within  people’s  living  and  working  surroundings  to  im-
prove their health and well-being, quality of life, user experience, and independence [10]. 
In  general,  ADLs  may  be  considered  as  the  everyday  activities  needed  for  one’s  suste-
nance done in one’s living surroundings [11]. Categories of ADLs include personal hy-
giene, dressing, eating, continence management, and mobility.   

As one becomes older, one becomes more prone to falling. As per [12], a fall is defined 
as a sudden drop onto the ground or floor resulting from being pushed or pulled, envi-
ronmental factors, fainting, or any other analogous health-related issues, difficulties, or 
impairments. Falls can have many consequences on the health, well-being, and quality of 
life of the elderly, such as making it difficult for them to complete ADLs. On a worldwide 
scale, falls are the second most common cause of unintentional fatalities. Older individu-
als are at an increased risk of suffering a traumatic brain injury due to falling [13]. On an 
annual basis, around one in every three older persons fall at least once a year, and it is 
estimated that the percentage of those who fall will rise by around 50% soon [14,15]. Falls 
have  been  a  major  concern  for  the  worldwide  elderly  population.  In  the  United  States 
alone, since 2009, the number of people who have died from falls has increased by 30%. 
In the United States, every 11 seconds, an elderly person who has fallen has to be sent to 
the hospital for urgent care; an older adult dies every 19 minutes from a fall; every year, 
there  are approximately  3 million emergency room visits, 800,000 hospitalizations, and 
more than 32,000 fatalities among the elderly due to falls. The rate of injuries and fatalities 
from falls is rising consistently. By 2030, in the United States, research predicts that there 
will be seven deaths per hour from falls. The yearly cost of medical and healthcare-related 
costs  connected  to  falls  among  the  elderly  is  USD  50  billion.  This  figure  is  expected  to 
grow not only in the US but also on a global scale [16-18]. A fall can be caused by various 
reasons, which can be roughly classified as internal and external. External causes are re-
lated to the environmental variables in the spatial confines of the individual that might 
contribute to a fall. These include slippery surfaces, staircases, and so forth. Causes such 
as impaired eyesight, cramping, weakening in muscular skeleton structure, chronic dis-
eases, and so on are examples of internal reasons for a fall. In addition to causing mild to 
serious physical injuries, falls can have a wide range of negative effects on the individual, 
which may include individual—injuries, bruising, blood clots; social life—reduced mobil-
ity leading to loneliness and social isolation; cognitive or mental—fear of moving about, 
lack of confidence in doing ADLs; and financial—the expenses of medical treatment and 
caretakers [19].   

 
 
3  of  25 

To accurately detect falls and the other dynamic and diversified needs of the elderly 
that usually arise in the context of their living environments during ADLs, tracking and 
analysis  of  the  indoor  spatial  and  contextual  data  associated  with  these  activities  are 
highly crucial. Technologies such as Global Positioning Systems (GPS) and Global Navi-
gation Satellite Systems (GNSS) have transformed navigation research by allowing peo-
ple, objects, and assets to be tracked in real time. Despite their great success in outdoor 
contexts, these technologies are still unsuccessful in indoor settings [20]. This is due to two 
factors: first, these technologies rely on line-of-sight communication between GPS satel-
lites and receivers, which is not achievable in an  indoor setting, and second, GPS has a 
maximum accuracy of up to five meters [21]. An Indoor Localization System is a network 
of systems, devices, and services that assist in tracking and locating persons, objects, and 
assets in indoor environments where satellite navigation systems like GPS and GNSS are 
ineffective [22]. Thus, Indoor Localization becomes highly relevant for AAL so that the 
future of technology-based living environments such as Smart Homes can take a compre-
hensive approach towards addressing the  multimodal and diverse needs of the  elderly 
during different ADLs as and when such needs arise.   

Despite  recent  advances  in  AAL  research,  when  considering  the  development  of 
smart home technologies, numerous challenges remain, as mentioned in detail in Section 
2. These challenges are primarily centered around - the lack of real-world testing, lack of 
functionalities in the frameworks to detect both falls and indoor locations in a simultane-
ous manner, high cost of implementation, complicated design paradigms, the requirement 
of  multiple  hardware  components  for  deployment,  and  the  necessity  to  develop  new 
hardware or software for implementation, which make the wide-scale deployment of such 
technologies challenging. With an aim to address these challenges, our paper makes the 
following scientific contributions to this field: 

1. 

It presents a simplistic design paradigm for an AAL system that can capture mul-
timodal components of user behaviors during ADLs that are necessary for per-
forming fall detection and indoor localization  in a simultaneous manner in the 
real world. A comprehensive comparative study (Table 3) with prior  works in 
the  fields  of  indoor  localization  and  fall  detection  is  presented  in  this  paper, 
which shows how this proposed system outperforms prior works in the fields of 
indoor localization and fall detection in terms of the effectiveness of software de-
sign and hardware design. 

2.  The  development  of  this  system  is  highly  cost-effective.  We  present  a  second 
comparative study (Table 4) where we compare the cost of our system with the 
cost of prior works in these fields, which involved real-time development. This 
comparative  study  upholds  the  fact  that  the  cost  of  our  system  is  the  least  as 
compared to all these works, thereby upholding its cost-effective nature. For this 
comparative study, we used only the cost of equipment as the grounds for com-
parison. While there can be several other costs (such as cost of installation, cost 
of maintenance, the salary of research personnel, cost of deployment, computa-
tional costs, etc.) that can be computed, but most of the prior works in this field 
reported  only  the  cost  of  equipment,  so  only  this  parameter  was  used  as  the 
grounds for comparison in this comparative study. Furthermore, comparing the 
cost of the associated equipment to comment on the cost-effectiveness of the un-
derlying  system  is  an  approach  that  has  been  followed  by  researchers  in  the 
broad domain of IoT as can be seen from recent works in this field (Section 4.2). 
The rest of this paper is presented as follows. Section 2 reviews the recent works in 
this field and elaborates on the challenges and limitations that exist in these systems. Sec-
tion 3 presents the methodology and concept for the development of the proposed system. 
Section 4 presents the results and discussions from the real-world testing of the proposed 
system. It also includes the above-mentioned comparison studies. It is followed by Section 
5, which concludes the paper and outlines the scope for future work in this field.   

 
 
4  of  25 

2. Literature Review 

In this section, a comprehensive review of recent works in Indoor Localization and 

Fall Detection that focused on Ambient Assisted Living is presented. 

Varma et al. [23] developed an indoor localization system using a Random Forest-
driven machine learning approach based on data gathered from 13 beacons installed in a 
simulated Internet of Things (IoT) infrastructure. To get the user’s location, the researchers 
processed the data from all these beacons. The development of a neural network-based 
indoor WiFi fingerprinting method by Qin et al. [24] enabled a user’s position to be pin-
pointed in an indoor setting. They examined their findings on two datasets to discuss the 
effectiveness of their work. The user’s position was detected using a decision tree-based 
technique in the research proposed by Musa et al. [25]. The system design included a non-
line-of-sight  approach,  multipath  propagation  tracking,  and  ultra-wideband  technique. 
Similarly,  a decision tree-based method for  indoor  location detection was presented by 
Yim et al. [26]. The system was able to use WiFi fingerprinting data to build the decision 
tree offline. According to Hu et al. [27] ’s technique, a k-NN classification methodology 
with contextual data from an indoor environment can locate a person’s indoor position 
by using the access point the person was closest to after accessing it. Poulose et al. [28] 
developed a deep learning-based method for indoor position tracking that employed Re-
ceived Signal Strength Indicator (RSSI) signal data to train the learning model. Barsocchi 
et al. [29] utilized a linear regression-based learning technique to build an indoor posi-
tioning system that used RSSI values to track the user’s distance from reference locations 
and subsequently translated the same numerical value to a distance measure to locate the 
user’s  real  position.  Kothari  et  al.  [30]  created  a  cost-effective,  user-location-detecting 
smartphone application. Four volunteers were included in the trials to evaluate the tech-
nique, which merged dead reckoning with WiFi fingerprinting. Wu et al. [31] created an 
indoor positioning system using data from new sensors incorporated into the users’ mo-
bile phones that could utilize user motion and user behavioral features to create a radio 
map with a floor plan, which could subsequently be used to determine the users’ indoor 
positions. The researchers recruited a total of 4 participants to evaluate their framework. 
Gu  et  al.  [32]  suggested  a  step  counting  method  that  could  address  challenges  such  as 
over-counting steps and false walking while tracking the user’s indoor location; that was 
validated by taking into consideration the data collected from 8 participants. Similar de-
sign paradigms were followed by researchers in [33-35] to test the underlining systems. 
In addition to these approaches for indoor localization, the concept of optical positioning 
has  also  been  explored  in  some  research  works  [36-42]  in  this  field.  The  success  of  the 
optical positioning approach is centered around the use of optical positioning sensors to 
detect the indoor locations of people and objects.   

Following the above, we examine recent AAL works related to fall detection. An al-
gorithm designed by Rafferty et al. [43] used thermal vision to track falls during ADLs. 
The system architecture  involved installing thermal vision sensors on the ceiling in the 
confines  of  the  user’s  living  space,  and  then  computer  vision  algorithms  were  used  to 
identify falls. In the work of Ozcan et al. [44], the camera had to be carried by the user 
instead of being installed at various locations. A decision tree-based technique was uti-
lized to identify falls based on images taken by the user’s camera. A wearable device for 
fall detection was developed by Khan et al. [45]. This gadget had a three-part assembly: a 
camera, a gyroscope, and an accelerometer, all of which were connected to a computer 
that comprised the system architecture to detect falls. The work of Cahoolessur et al. in 
[46] introduced a binary classifier-based device capable of finding anomalies in behavioral 
patterns  such  as  falls  in  a  simulated  IoT-based  environment.  To  design  the  wearable 
gadget, the authors first developed a model for the user, using a cloud computing-based 
architecture, which was followed by implementation and testing of the same. Godfrey et 
al. [47] unified algorithms for fall detection and gait segmentation for developing a frame-
work to assess the free living of individuals suffering from Parkinson’s disease. Liu et al. 
[48]  used  Doppler  sensors  to  develop  a  fall  detection  system  with  a  specific  focus  on 

 
 
5  of  25 

detecting falls in senior citizens. In [49] and [50], Dinh et al. proposed a novel wearable 
device and a system architecture that used inertial sensors and Zigbee transceivers to de-
tect  falls.  The  works  in  [51]  and  [52]  proposed  somewhat  similar  system  paradigms  as 
compared to the previous works to track the positions and health status of individuals for 
their assisted living. Hsu et al. [53] developed a backpropagation neural network that used 
the Gaussian Mixture Model (G.M.M.) to detect falls during various forms of movement 
patterns. In [54], Yun et al. developed a smart camera-based system for fall detection. The 
system worked by detecting falls from a single camera with arbitrary view angles. Ngu-
yen et al. [55] proposed a computer vision-based system for fall detection that was char-
acterized by low power consumption during its operation. In [56], Huang used a combi-
nation of ultrasonic sensors and field-programmable gate array (FPGA) processors to de-
velop a system architecture to monitor the postures and motions of individuals to detect 
falls. In [57], the authors proposed UbiCare, which was a system developed by integration 
of several commercially available sensors such as Arduino microcontrollers and ZigBee 
communicators for the assisted living of the elderly during ADLs.   

In addition to these works on indoor localization and fall detection, there has been a 
significant amount of work in these fields where only datasets were used to test and vali-
date the proposed software designs and/or software frameworks. These include the works 
in indoor localization by Song et al. [58], Kim et al. [59], Jang et al. [60], Wang et al. [61], 
Qin et al. [62], Wietrzykowski et al. [63], Panja et al. [64], Yin et al. [65], Patil et al. [66], 
Gan et al. [67], Hoang et al. [68], and Seçkin et al. [69]. In the field of fall detection, such 
works include the systems proposed by – Galvão et al. [70], Sase et al. [71], Li et al. [72], 
Theodoridis et al. [73], Abobakr et al. [74], Abdo et al. [75], Sowmyayani et al. [76], Kalita 
et al. [77], Soni et al. [78], Serpa et al. [79], and Lin et al. [80].   

As can be seen from these recent works [23-80] in the field of AAL, with a specific 
focus on fall detection and indoor localization, the following challenges exist in these sys-
tems: 

1.  The available AAL-based systems for fall detection cannot track the user’s indoor 
location and vice versa. Furthermore, the  hardware components (sensors) that 
were used to develop the fall detection systems cannot be programmed or cus-
tomized to capture the necessary data required for incorporating the functional-
ity of indoor localization in such systems and vice versa. For instance, a host of 
beacons [23], WiFi access points [26], and WiFi fingerprint capturing architecture 
[27] help to capture the necessary data for indoor localization but these hardware 
components cannot be programmed or customized to capture any relevant data 
that would be necessary for detecting falls. It is highly essential that, in addition 
to being able to track, analyze, and interpret human behavior, such systems are 
also able to detect the associated indoor location so that the same can be commu-
nicated  to  caregivers  or  emergency  responders  to  facilitate  timely  care  in  the 
event  of  a  fall  or  any  similar  health-related  emergencies.  Delay  in  care  from  a 
health-related emergency, such as a fall, can have both short-term and long-term 
health-related impacts.   

2.  A  majority  of  these  systems  were  tested  on  datasets  [24,  58-80].  The  proposed 
software designs and/or software frameworks that were used by the authors of 
these respective works cannot be directly applied in the real world to detect falls 
and indoor locations of users during ADLs performed in real-time as the under-
lining systems were not developed to work based on incoming or continuously 
generating human behavior-based data from the real-world.   

3.  While there have been some works that have involved the real-world implemen-
tation of the underlining AAL systems, the cost of equipment necessary for the 
development of such systems is very high. For instance, the  systems proposed 
by: Kohoutek et al. [36] costs USD 9000, Muffert et al. [37] costs more than USD 
10000, Tilsch et al. [38] costs about USD 1050, Habbecke et al. costs about USD 
1050, Popescu et al. [40] costs USD 1500, Huang et al. [56] costs USD 750, Dasios 

 
 
6  of  25 

et al. [57] costs USD 581, and so on. Such high costs are a major challenge to the 
real-world development and wide-scale deployment of such systems across mul-
tiple smart homes.   

4.  These methodologies use multiple sensors and hardware systems that need to be 
installed in the living confines of the user. Some examples include - 13 beacons 
[23], WiFi access points and WiFi fingerprint capturing architecture [26,27], RSSI 
data  capturing  methodologies  [28,29],  thermal  vision  sensors  [43],  and  smart 
cameras [44] that need to be carried by the users. Installing such sensors across 
smart communities or smart cities that could represent multiple interconnected 
smart homes would be highly costly, and the elderly are usually receptive to the 
introduction of such a host of hardware components in their living environments 
[81].   

5.  The design process for the  development of  most of these systems [23,26-29,33-
42,47-57] is complicated as it involves the integration and communication of mul-
tiple software and hardware components. As there is a need for the development 
of AAL systems that can perform both fall detections and indoor localizations in 
a simultaneous manner in the  real world, so integrating the  hardware compo-
nents of these underlining systems (integrating hardware components from sys-
tems aimed at fall detection with hardware components from systems aimed at 
indoor  localization)  and  developing  a  software  framework  that  can  communi-
cate, share, and exchange data with all these hardware components in a seamless 
manner in real-time would be even more complicated.   

6.  Some  of the  works have also involved the  development of  new applications  – 
such as the smartphone-based application proposed in [30] and the wearable de-
vices proposed in [46], [49], and [50]. Replicating the design of an application has 
several challenges unless it is replicated or re-developed by the original develop-
ers [82]. In the context of wearables, it is crucial to ensure that the design meth-
odology  follows  the  ‘wearables  for  all’  design  approaches  [83],  which  poses  a 
challenge to the mass development of such wearable solutions.   

To address the above limitations, we propose a cost-effective and simplistic design 
paradigm for  an Ambient  Assisted Living system  that can capture multimodal compo-
nents of the user behavior during ADLs that are necessary for performing fall detection 
and indoor localization  in a simultaneous manner in the real world. The system design 
and the associated methodology are discussed in the next section.   

3. Methodology and System Design 

This section outlines the design process for the development of the proposed  AAL 
system. The design process is based on the findings of two of our recent works [84,85] in 
these fields. These works [84,85] were centered around the development of systems for 
detecting falls and tracking the indoor location of users during ADLs. Various forms of 
user  interaction  data,  user  behavior  data,  and  user  posture  data  were  studied  in  these 
works. The proposed system architectures were tested on different datasets, and the find-
ings from both these works prove that the accelerometer and gyroscope data (in X, Y, and 
Z directions) collected from wearables during different ADLs can be studied, analyzed, 
interpreted,  and  utilized  to  develop  a  machine  learning-based  classifier  that  can  detect 
falls as well as track indoor locations of users with a very high level of accuracy.   

In this paper, we extend both these works to develop a cost-effective and simplistic 
design  paradigm  for  an  Ambient  Assisted  Living  system  that  can  capture  multimodal 
components of user behaviors during ADLs that are necessary for performing fall detec-
tion and indoor localization in a simultaneous manner in the real world. These respective 
functionalities for fall detection and indoor localization are outlined in 3.1 and 3.2, respec-
tively. The proposed design and the associated system specifications that integrate both 
these functionalities [84,85] as a software solution for a real-world environment are pre-
sented in Section 3.3. 

 
 
7  of  25 

3.1. Methodology for Fall Detection during ADLs 

This approach’s design specification [84] comprises four main components: pose de-
tection, data collecting and preprocessing, learning module, and performance module. To 
identify the user’s position at any given time, the pose  detection system utilizes motion 
and movement-related data during ADLs to deduce the user’s instantaneous position. The 
study of accelerometer data during various activities at various timestamps is one way of 
creating such a pose identification system. This is measured by computing the acceleration 
vector and the acceleration’s orientation angles measured on all three axes. Every posture, 
motion, and movement may be investigated by computing these orientation angles as a 
unique spatial orientation during different stages or steps of any given ADL. In this case, 
the location of the sensor on the body is equally essential. An accelerometer positioned on 
the chest of a person, for instance, is always at 90 degrees with the floor for motions like 
standing and sitting but at 0 degrees with the floor for other types of movements like lying 
on the ground or being in a stance in which both arms and legs are touching the floor. In 
analyzing postures or poses related to various ADLs, the purpose is to compute orientation 
angles along the three axes. If the user is moving, they will adopt dynamic postures. The 
rapid changes in the values of the acceleration angles can be used to identify falls or mo-
tions associated with falls. The approach for collecting and preparing data is part of the 
data collection and preprocessing module of this system. The learning module of the sys-
tem  comprised  the  AdaBoost  approach  with  the  cross-validation  operator  applied  to  a 
kNN classifier. The performance module evaluated the performance of the learning mod-
ule using a confusion matrix. It was tested on two datasets [87,88]. The system achieved 
performance accuracies of 99.87% and 99.66%, respectively, when tested on these two da-
tasets. The study did not report any hardware system design for real-world development. 
Neither did it report any real-world data collection methodology that would be necessary 
for such a system to function in real-time. The findings also showed that the accelerometer 
data and gyroscope data (from X, Y, and Z directions) comprise the necessary attributes 
that are needed to develop such a system that can outperform all prior works in the field 
of  fall  detection  in  terms  of  performance  accuracy  (the  detailed  comparison  study  with 
prior works in fall detection has been presented in [84]).   

3.2. Methodology for Indoor Localization during ADLs 

The development of the proposed approach [85] for acceleration and gyroscope data-

based indoor localization during ADLs involves the following steps: 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

The associated representation scheme involves mapping the entire spatial lo-
cation  into  non-overlapping  ‘activity-based  zones’  [85],  distinct  to  different 
complex activities, by performing complex activity analysis [89].   
The complex activity analysis as per [89] involves detecting and analyzing the 
ADLs in terms of the atomic activities, context attributes, core atomic activities, 
core  context  attributes,  start  atomic  activities,  start  context  attributes,  end 
atomic activities, and end context attributes using probabilistic reasoning prin-
ciples and the associated weights of each of these components of a given ADL.   
Inferring the semantic relationships between the changing dynamics of these 
actions and the context-based parameters of these actions.     
Studying and analyzing the semantic relationships between the accelerometer 
data, gyroscope data, and the associated actions and the context-based param-
eters of these actions (obtained from the complex activity analysis) within each 
‘activity-based zone’.   
Interpreting the semantic relationships between the accelerometer data, gyro-
scope  data,  and  the  associated  actions  and  the  context-based  parameters  of 
these actions across different ‘activity-based zones’ based on the sequence in 
which the different ADLs took place and the related temporal information. 

 
 
8  of  25 

6. 

7. 

Integrating the findings from Step 4 and Step 5 to interpret the interrelated and 
semantic relationships between the accelerometer data and the gyroscope data 
with  the  location  information  associated  with  different  ADLs  that  were  suc-
cessfully completed in all the ‘activity-based zones’ in the given indoor envi-
ronment.   
Splitting the data into the training set and test set and developing a machine 
learning-based model to detect the location of a user in terms of these spatial 
‘zones’ based on the associated accelerometer data and gyroscope data.   
Computing the accuracy of the system by using a confusion matrix. 

8. 
Based on the above steps, the system was developed by using a Random Forest clas-
sifier. The effectiveness of the system was tested using a dataset [88]. The study did not 
report any hardware system design for real-world development. Neither did it report any 
real-world data collection methodology that would be necessary for such a system to func-
tion in real-time. The system achieved an overall performance accuracy of 81.13% for de-
tecting  the  indoor  location  of  a  user  in  different  activity-based  zones  such  as  bedroom 
zone, kitchen zone, office zone, and toilet zone. The findings also showed that the accel-
erometer data and gyroscope data (from X, Y, and Z directions) during ADLs can be used 
to develop a context-independent indoor localization system that can work effectively to 
detect the indoor location of a user in different IoT-based settings.   

3.3. Methodology for Indoor Localization and Fall Detection: Real-World Implementation 

The development of the proposed system, including its design and specifications by 
incorporating the functionalities for fall detection [84] and indoor localization [85] (out-
lined in Sections 3.1 and 3.2, respectively), is presented in this section. The system, pro-
posed as a software solution, functioned by following a design paradigm that involved 
successful  integration,  communication,  and  interfacing  between  multiple  sensors  that 
were characterized by their capabilities to capture the necessary data (as outlined in Sec-
tions 3.1 and 3.2, respectively). Upon obtaining this necessary data, the system would be 
able  to  extract  the  interdependent  and  multi-level  semantic  relationships  between  user 
interactions, context parameters, and daily activities concerning the dynamic spatial, tem-
poral, and global orientations  of a user  during different ADLs. This system was devel-
oped, implemented, deployed, and tested at the Ambient Assisted Living Research Lab 
located at 411 Science Building, University of Cincinnati Victory Parkway Campus.   

The  design  paradigm  of  the  proposed  system  involved  following  a  simplistic  and 
cost-effective  approach  towards  integration,  communication,  and  interfacing  between 
multiple off-the-shelf sensors. These off-the-shelf sensors comprised the following: 

(a)  The Imou Bullet 2S Smart Camera: The Imou Bullet 2S is a smart camera that can 
directly connect to WiFi and can be used to capture different components of the 
video-based and image-based data during different ADLs. It has features such as 
infrared  mode,  color  mode,  smart  mode,  and  human  detection.  The  technical 
specifications of this smart camera include 1080P Full HD glass optics, 2.8 mm 
lens, 120° viewing angle, 98ft night vision, IR lighting, inbuilt image-processing 
algorithm, storage facility via the H.265 compression system on an SD card (up 
to  256  GB)  or  on  an  encrypted  cloud  server,  human  motion  detection,  and  in-
built microphone [90].   

(b)  The Sleeve Sensor Research Kit: The Sleeve Sensor Research Kit has several com-
ponents to record the different characteristics of motion and behavior data dur-
ing ADLs. These  include an Accelerometer,  Gyroscope, Magnetometer, Sensor 
Fusion, Pressure Sensor, and Temperature Sensor. Specifically, this MMS sensing 
system  consists  of  a  wearable  device  with  the  following  sensors:  6-axis  Accel-
erometer + Gyroscope, BMI270 Temperature, BMP280 LTR-329ALS, BMP280 Ba-
rometer/Pressure/Altimeter,  Ambient  Light/Luminosity  Magnetometer,  with 
three axes, BMM150 Sensor Fusion, 9-axis BOSCH 512MB memory, Lithium-ion 
rechargeable battery, Bluetooth Low Energy, CPU, button, LED, and GPIOs [91]. 

 
 
9  of  25 

(c)  The Estimote Proximity Beacons: The Estimote Proximity Beacons can be used to 
track the proximity of a user to different context parameters as well as to detect 
the presence or absence of the user in a specific ‘activity-based zone’ during dif-
ferent ADLs. Each beacon has a low-power ARM® CPU (e.g., 32-bit or 64 MHz 
CPU), a quad-core, 64-bit, 1.2 GHz CPU in Mirror flash memory to store apps 
and data, 8 GB in Mirror RAM memory for the apps to use while running, 1 GB 
in Mirror, a Bluetooth antenna and chip to communicate with other devices, and 
between the beacons themselves [92]. 

Based on the  system paradigms described in Sections 3.1 and 3.2 and the  physical 
dimensions of the Ambient Assisted Living lab, 2 Imou Bullet 2S Smart Cameras, 1 Sleeve 
Sensor Research Kit, and 4 Estimote Proximity Beacons were used for developing the pro-
posed system.  In addition to these sensors, Microsoft SQL Server version 11.0 [93] was 
used to develop the database, which is an integral part of the proposed software solution. 
Microsoft SQL Server is a Relational Database Management System (RDBMS) developed 
by Microsoft. These sensors were specifically chosen for the following reasons: 

1.  These  sensors  can  be  programmed  to  capture  the  specific  components  of  user 
behavior and user posture data (as evidenced in our prior works – [84] and [85]) 
that are necessary to detect both falls and indoor locations during ADLs.   

2.  They are cost-effective. 
3.  These sensors are easily available and can be seamlessly set up in any given in-

door space or region without any training. 

4.  The development of a software solution that can communicate and interface with 

all these sensors is not complicated.   

5.  The design process, both for the experiments and for the system architecture, be-
comes convenient due to the specifications, coverage, and characteristics of these 
sensors.     

Figure 1 Flowchart illustrating the working of the proposed system 

 
 
 
10  of  25 

The  simplistic nature of this design process as compared to all prior  works in this 
field is explained next. As can be seen from Section 2, the works that involved real-world 
fall  detection  or  indoor  localization  involved  multiple  sensors  and/or  hardware  equip-
ment. For instance – as per recent works in these fields, some of the most commonly used 
sensors and/or hardware equipment for indoor localization include - 13 beacons (Varma 
et al. [23]), RSSI transmitters and receivers (Poulose et al. [28] and Barsocchi et al. [29]), 
system setup for capturing WiFi fingerprints (Yim et al. [26] and Kothari et al. [30]) as well 
as the development of completely new sensors (Wu et al. [31]). Similarly, some of the most 
commonly used sensors and/or hardware equipment for fall detection include - thermal 
vision cameras (Rafferty et al. [43]), smart cameras (Ozcan et al. [44] and Yun et al. [54]), 
Doppler sensors (Liu et al. [48]), Inertial Sensors and Zigbee transceivers (Dinh et al. [49] 
and  [50]),  and  ultrasonic  sensors  and  FPGA  processors  (Huang  [56]).  The  sensors  that 
were used for  indoor  localization cannot be  programmed or  customized to detect falls. 
Similarly, the sensors that were used to detect falls cannot be programmed or customized 
to track the indoor locations of users. We discussed the need for the future of AAL systems 
to be able to detect both falls and indoor locations in a simultaneous manner in real-time 
(Section 1). Therefore, based on these recent works, such an AAL system would involve 
the integration of sensors used in any of the works for indoor localization (for instance – 
[23], [28], or [29]) with the sensors used in any of these works for fall detection (for instance 
– [43], [44], [54], [48], [49], [50], [56]). An example of such a system could include a system 
architecture that comprises a host of 13 beacons for indoor localization (if the  indoor lo-
calization methodology proposed in [23] is used) and a host of inertial sensors and Zigbee 
transceivers mounted throughout the living space of an individual (if the  fall detection 
methodology proposed in [49] or [50] is used). Thereafter, the software design also has to 
be customized so that the underlining software can seamlessly communicate and process 
the  real-time  data  coming  from  these  host  of  hardware  components  or  sensors.  Such  a 
system setup (both in terms of integrating the hardware components and as well as for 
setting up the software component to seamlessly communicate with all the hardware com-
ponents) is going to be much more complicated as compared to the integration of a few 
off-the-shelf sensors (2 Imou Bullet 2S Smart Cameras, 1 Sleeve Sensor Research Kit, and 
4 Estimote Proximity Beacons) that can be programmed to capture the required compo-
nents of user behavior and user posture data that are necessary to detect falls as well as 
detect indoor  locations during ADLs  in a  simultaneous manner  in  the  real  world. This 
helps to uphold the simplistic design paradigm of the proposed system. This is further 
explained in the rest of this section. 

The flowchart for the development of our system is shown in Figure 1. As can be seen 
from Figure 1, the system comprises of three main components – data capture, data pro-
cessing and integration, and database development. The data capture process was cen-
tered around activation, calibration, and utilization of the sensor components to start cap-
turing the data. This process comprised of the video data collected by the Imou Bullet 2S 
Smart Camera’s in .mp4 format, the accelerometer and gyroscope data collected by the 
Sleeve Sensor  Research Kit available  as different .csv files, and the  proximity detection 
data in terms of presence or absence of the user in a specific activity-based zone collected 
by the Estimote Proximity Beacons. As there were four proximity beacons that were set 
up, so, at a given point of time when the user was present in a specific activity-based zone, 
the proximity beacon of that zone would mark the user as present, and the  other three 
proximity beacons (present in three other activity-based zones) would mark the user as 
absent in those respective zones. The next module of this system was the big data pro-
cessing and integration  module. The functionality of this module was characterized by 
preprocessing and integration of the data from the different sensors in one format. This 
module also involved the capability to successfully communicate with different  sensors 
while each of these sensors was collecting data in real-time. This module was developed 
as an application using the C# programming language in the .NET framework on a Win-
dows 10 computer with an Intel (R) Core (TM) i7-7600U CPU @ 2.80 GHz, two core(s), and 

 
 
11  of  25 

four logical processor(s). While other programming languages could also have been used, 
C# was used in view of the developer features provided by these respective sensor plat-
forms, as well as the ease of integration and communication between applications devel-
oped on C# and .NET and Microsoft SQL Server 2012, version 11.0. The next module, da-
tabase development, was centered around the  development of a database on Microsoft 
SQL Server 2012, version 11.0 [93]. Microsoft SQL Server 2012, version 11.0, is available 
for free download at the link mentioned in [93], so no additional expenses were incurred 
for setting up this database on a local server. The database comprised different attributes 
that represented the different characteristics of the data obtained from the different sensor 
components  upon  the  successful  integration  of  the  same.  As  this  is  a  proof  of  concept 
study, here we are demonstrating the ability of our proposed system to capture the spe-
cific components of user interaction, user behavior, and user posture data (as evidenced 
in prior works – [84] and [85]) that are necessary for performing fall detection and indoor 
localization during ADLs in a real-world scenario. In the near future, we will be adding 
another module to the system, which would be the detection module. This module would 
comprise the  specific  systems for  fall detection and indoor  localization (as proposed in 
prior works [84] and [85]) to enable those systems to function on real-time data.   

Figure 2 is a screenshot from the user interface of the software, which shows the real-
time data collection from the Sleeve Sensor Research Kit from Mbient Labs during one of 
the experiments. Figure 3 shows the Sleeve Sensor Research Kit. This image is provided 
separately as due to the small size of the sensor, it is difficult to track the location of the 
sensor in the images from the experiments, which are provided in Section 4. During the 
experiments, as per  the  methodology described in Sections 3.1 and 3.2, this sensor  was 
mounted on the user’s chest to collect the data during different ADLs performed in dif-
ferent ‘activity-based zones’. Figures 4 and 5 show the placement of multiple proximity 
sensors in different ‘activity-based zones’. Figures 6 and 7 show the strategic and calcu-
lated placement of the two Imou smart cameras, which helped to map the entire available 
space in the research lab.   

Figure 2. Real-time data collection from the Sleeve Sensor Research Kit from Mbient Labs during 
one of the experiments 

As can be seen from Figures 6 and 7, dedicated strategic locations (marked as Camera 
1 zone and Camera 2 zone) were assigned in the lab space for the setting up of both these 
Imou Smart cameras. The cost of all these sensors (at the time of purchase) is outlined in 
Table 1. In Section 4, we compare this cost to the cost of similar fall detection, indoor lo-
calization, and assisted living solutions  that have been proposed in prior  works in this 
field to justify the cost-effectiveness of this proposed approach.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12  of  25 

Figure 3. The Sleeve Sen-
sor Research Kit 

Figure  4.  Placement  of  one  of  the 
proximity  sensors  in  the 
‘Study-
Zone. 

Figure 5.  Placement of  multiple  proximity sensors  in  the 
‘Study-Zone.’   

Figure  6.  Placement  of  one  of  the 
Imou Smart Cameras 

Figure  7.  Placement  of  the  second 
Imou Smart Camera 

Table 1. Costs of the sensors that are necessary for development of the proposed system. 

Sensor 

Imou Smart Camera 
Mbient Labs Sleeve Sensor 
Proximity Sensors 
Microsoft SQL Server 11.0 

Cost  per  unit 
(in USD) 
$29.99 
$103.99 
$24.75 
$0.00 

Total Cost (in 
USD) 
$59.98 
$103.99 
$99.00 
$0.00 

The total cost of all the sensors    $262.97 

4. Results and Discussions 

This section presents the implementation details, preliminary results, and associated 
discussions  to  uphold  the  potential,  effectiveness,  and  relevance  of  the  proposed  AAL 
system. Section 4.1 presents the findings from real-world experiments. This section also 
compares the functionality of our system with prior works in this field to highlight the 
novelty of the same. Section 4.2 presents a comparative study with prior works related to 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13  of  25 

fall detection, indoor localization, and assisted living to justify the cost-effective nature of 
the system.   

4.1. Results and Findings from Real-World Implementation 

The real-world development, implementation, and testing of this system were per-
formed by taking into consideration the safety and protection of human subjects. There-
fore, the CITI Training provided by the University of Cincinnati that comprises the CITI 
Training  Curriculum  of  the  Greater  Cincinnati  Academic  and  Regional  Health  Centers 
[94]  was  completed  by  both  authors.  Thereafter,  approval  for  this  study  was  obtained 
from the University of Cincinnati’s Institutional Review Board (IRB) [95] with IRB Regis-
tration #: 00000180, FWA #: 000003152, and the IRB ID for this study was 2019-1026. Figure 
8 shows the spatial mapping of two’ activity-based zones’ in the simulated IoT-based en-
vironment. Figures 9-13 show the  images captured from the  recordings from the  Imou 
smart cameras during one of the participants performing different ADLs in these ‘activity-
based zones’. The experiment protocol included the participant navigating across differ-
ent ‘activity-based zones’ and performing different ADLs, including falls and fall-like mo-
tions to simulate real-world ADLs and falls. The performance of the ADLs included dif-
ferent behaviors such as walking,  stopping,  falling,  lying down, getting up from lying, 
etc., some of which are represented in these figures. These activities were tracked by the 
Imou Smart Camera’s, Mbient Labs Sleeve Sensor, and the Proximity Sensors. The Mbient 
Labs Sleeve Sensor was mounted on the participant’s chest during the entire duration of 
the experimental trials. The decision to mount an accelerometer on a participant’s chest 
was made as per the findings of Gjoreksi et al. [96]. These findings state that mounting an 
accelerometer on an individual’s chest is the optimal location for accelerometer-based fall 
detection. The Imou smart cameras were placed at two strategic and calculated locations 
that helped to track all ADLs performed in all the simulated ‘activity-based zones’. The 
proximity sensors helped to detect the participant’s presence or absence in each of these 
‘activity-based  zones’  in  the  context  of  different  behavioral  patterns  during  different 
ADLs. The software that comprised the Big Data processing and integration module (Fig-
ure 1) communicated with all these sensors to capture the associated data, convert it into 
a common format (.csv files), and develop a database on MS SQL Server with the different 
data represented as different attributes in the database.     

Figure 8. Overview of the lab space showing two ‘activity-based zones’ (bedroom zone and study 
zone) with multiple contextual parameters 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14  of  25 

Figure 9. A participant sitting on a 
couch in the relaxation zone 

Figure 10. A participant lying in the bed-
room zone 

Figure  11.  A  participant  walking  from 
the relaxation zone to the bedroom zone 

Figure 12. A participant falling in the relaxation zone. Here, 
a forward fall is demonstrated.   

Figure 13. A participant falling in the relaxation zone. Here, a 
sideways fall is demonstrated. 

The original plan was to test all the proposed functionalities of this system by includ-
ing 20 volunteers (ten males and ten females) for user diversity [97]. But no one predicted 
the widespread of the COVID-19 pandemic [98], the declaration of a national emergency 
in the United States on account of the same [99], and the subsequent lockdown for several 
months with more than 517,572,198 cases of COVID-19 with 6,277,510 deaths on a global 
scale [100]. In the United States alone, at the time of writing this paper, there have been 
83,644,452 cases of COVID-19 with 1,024,655 deaths [100]. Therefore, it was not possible 
to recruit 20 volunteers. As a result, we were able to perform the proposed experiments 
with  only  one  volunteer.  This  is  one  of  the  limitations  of  this  study,  which  we  plan  to 
address in the near future by recruiting more volunteers for the experiments. While this 
is a limitation of this study, upon reviewing prior works in this field, we observed that 
there have been several real-world systems for fall detection, indoor localization, and as-
sisted living, the  effectiveness of which was evaluated by one  volunteer  or  participant. 
Some examples include the works of Godfrey et al. [47], Liu et al. [48], Dinh et al. [49,50], 
Townsend et  al. [51], Dombroski et  al.  [33], and Ichikari et  al. [34] (VDR Track), just to 
name a few. This is further illustrated in Table 2.       

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15  of  25 

Table 2. Prior works in the field of fall detection, indoor location, and assisted living that were 
tested using the data from only one human subject. 
Work 

Godfrey et al. [47] 
Liu et al. [48] 
Dinh et al. [49] 
Dinh et al. [50] 
Townsend et al. [51] 
Cordes et al. [52] 
Dombroski et al. [33] 
Ichikari et al. [34] (VDR Track) 
Lemic et al. [35] 
Thakur et al. [this work] 

Number  of  human  sub-
jects 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 

Based on Table 2, it can be observed that several prior works in this field evaluated 
and tested the effectiveness of their respective  systems and frameworks by conducting 
experiments  that  included  only  one  human  subject.  So,  even  though  the  availability  of 
only  one  human  subject  is  a  limitation  of  this  study,  it  is  consistent  with  several  prior 
works in this field, and the findings can be considered to uphold the potential, effective-
ness, and relevance of the proposed system and its functionality. The experiments with 
this volunteer were conducted as per the guidelines for reducing the spread of COVID-
19, recommended by both the Centers for Disease Control [101] and the University of Cin-
cinnati [102]. These guidelines also involved following the University of Cincinnati’s rec-
ommendations (at the time of conducting these experiments) to wear a mask in indoor 
environments, including classrooms and research labs, so the participant shown in Fig-
ures 9-13 can be seen wearing a mask. Figure 14 is a screenshot from the MS SQL server 
where the database was developed that consisted of the integration of the data collected 
from different sensors during the data collection process.   

Figure 14. Screenshot from the database table in MS SQL Server 2012 version that represents the 
data collected from different participants during the experimental trials.   

In the upper part of Figure 14, the SQL Query is represented that was used to query 
the developed database. In the lower part of Figure 14, the specific attributes that comprise 
this dataset are represented. The image shows only the first 11 rows for clarity of repre-
sentation.  The  first  two  attributes  represent  the  time  instants.  The  third  attribute 

 
 
 
 
16  of  25 

represents the time elapsed (in seconds) for the specific behavioral pattern under consid-
eration.  The  fourth,  fifth,  and  sixth  attributes  represent  the  acceleration  data  recorded 
along the X, Y, and Z directions for the specific behavioral pattern under consideration. 
Similarly, the seventh, eighth, and ninth attributes represent the gyroscope data recorded 
along the X, Y, and Z directions for the specific behavioral pattern under consideration. 
The data successfully collected from the different sensors during the different ADLs per-
formed in real-time and the successful processing and integration of the same towards the 
development of this database upholds the  relevance and effectiveness of this proposed 
design  methodology.  The  attributes  of  this  database  are  the  exact  same  attributes  (evi-
denced from the findings of [84] and [85]) that would be necessary for an AAL system to 
perform both fall detection and indoor localization during ADLs in a simultaneous man-
ner  in  real  time.  Figures  15  and  16  represent  the  variation  of  the  acceleration  data  and 
gyroscope data (in X, Y, and Z directions), respectively, during the different behavioral 
patterns  associated  with  these  ADLs  that  were  performed  in  different  ‘activity-based 
zones’ at different time instants. The data analysis to study this variation was performed 
in RapidMiner [103]. In both these figures, only a few timestamps are shown for clarity of 
representation.   

Figure 15. Variation of the acceleration data (in X, Y, and Z directions) during the different behav-
ioral patterns associated with different ADLs performed at different time instants. 

Figure 16. Variation of the gyroscope data (in X, Y, and Z directions) during the different behavioral 
patterns associated with these ADLs performed at different time instants. 

The  objective  of  performing  these  experiments  with  this  volunteer  was  to  demon-
strate the working and effectiveness of the proposed system to capture multimodal com-
ponents of user behaviors during ADLs that are necessary for performing fall detection 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17  of  25 

and indoor localization in a simultaneous manner in the real world. We understand that 
real-world users of such a system, typically the elderly, are expected to have a range of 
user  diversity  characteristics  that  could  be  different  from  one  or  more  of  the  diversity 
characteristics of this volunteer who participated in the experiments. Several prior works 
in the areas of studying human behavior from diverse users [104-107] have shown that 
while human behavior is affected by user diversity in more than one ways but user diver-
sity has no effect on the working and effectiveness of hardware and software components 
of a system aimed at collecting multimodal components of human behavior. For instance, 
a smart watch whose functionalities might have been tested using young volunteers dur-
ing the development stage will not stop working effectively if its real-world users are el-
derly  people  or  people  with  user  diversity  characteristics  that  might  be  different  from 
these young volunteers in one or more ways. Therefore, it can be concluded that this sec-
tion demonstrates the working and effectiveness of our system in the real world. In Table 
3, we compare the functionality of our system with prior works in this field to highlight 
the novelty of the same.   

In Table 3, in terms of effective software design, we refer to the effectiveness (marked 
by a ✓ sign in the Table) of the underlining software component of the system to receive 
(either from real-world data collection or from a relevant dataset), integrate, and process 
the  required  data  that  is  necessary  for  the  core  functionality  of  the  underlining  system 
such  as  fall  detection  or  indoor  localization.  In  terms  of  effective  hardware  design,  we 
refer to the effectiveness (marked by a ✓ sign in the Table) of the hardware components 
(such as sensors or other equipment) to function in real-time to collect the necessary data 
(relevant for the core functionality of the system such as fall detection or indoor localiza-
tion) that can be received by the software component of the system. As can be seen from 
Table 3, there are several systems that focus on fall detection with an effective software 
and hardware design. However, the hardware design of these systems does not provide 
the relevant data to its software components that be integrated and processed by the same 
to infer the indoor location of the underlining users. For instance, the hardware design of 
the work in [56] provides the data collected from ultrasonic sensors and field-program-
mable  gate  array  (FPGA) processors,  which  the  software  component  of  the  system  can 
receive,  integrate,  and  process  to  detect  falls,  but  this  data  is  irrelevant  for  performing 
indoor  localization.  Thus  the  software  design  and  hardware  design  of  this  system  and 
similar works are considered ineffective for indoor localization. Similarly, as can be seen 
from  Table  3,  there  are  several  systems  that  focus  on  indoor  localization  with  effective 
software and hardware design. However, the hardware design of these systems does not 
provide the relevant data to its software components that be integrated and processed by 
the same to perform fall detection. For instance, the hardware design of the works in [26] 
and [30] collect the WiFi fingerprint information, which the software component of the 
system can receive, integrate, and process to perform indoor localization, but this data is 
irrelevant for performing fall detection. Thus the software design and hardware design of 
these two systems and similar works are considered ineffective for fall detection. In Table 
3, we have also shown how the software design and hardware design of prior works in 
this field that were evaluated using datasets [58-80,84,85] can be compared with the pro-
posed system. The limitation in such works, including two of our prior works [84,85] (re-
viewed in Sections 3.1 and 3.2), is that these works present effective software designs with 
no hardware design. Furthermore, the underlying software designs cannot perform both 
indoor localization and fall detection simultaneously. The hardware design of our system 
is able to collect the necessary data (Sections 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, and 4.1) for both fall detection 
and indoor localization. The software design of our system demonstrates its effectiveness 
(Section 3.3 and 4.1) in receiving,  integrating,  and processing the  data provided by the 
hardware component of our system. This upholds the novelty of our system in terms of 
having an effective software design and hardware design, which can work together and 
capture multimodal components of the user behavior during ADLs that are necessary for 

 
 
performing  fall  detection  and  indoor  localization  in  a  simultaneous  manner  in  the  real 
world.   

Table  3.  Comparison  of  the  functionality  of  our  system  with  prior  works  in  this  field  in  terms  of  the  effectiveness  of  the 
software design and hardware design. 

18  of  25 

Focus Area of Work 

Author Names 

Fall Detection 
Effective 
Software 
Design   

Effective 
Hardware 
Design 

Indoor Localization 
Indoor Localization 
Indoor Localization 
Indoor Localization 
Indoor Localization 
Indoor Localization 
Indoor Localization 
Indoor Localization 
Indoor Localization 
Indoor Localization 
Fall Detection 
Fall Detection 
Fall Detection 
Fall Detection 
Fall Detection 
Fall Detection 
Fall Detection 
Fall Detection 
Fall Detection 
Fall Detection 
Fall Detection 
Fall Detection 
Indoor Localization 
Indoor Localization 
Indoor Localization 
Indoor Localization 
Indoor Localization 
Indoor Localization 
Indoor Localization 
Indoor Localization 
Indoor Localization 
Indoor Localization 
Indoor Localization 
Indoor Localization 
Fall Detection 
Fall Detection 
Fall Detection 
Fall Detection 
Fall Detection 
Fall Detection 
Fall Detection 
Fall Detection 
Fall Detection 
Fall Detection 
Fall Detection 
Fall Detection 
Indoor Localization 
Indoor Localization and Fall Detection 

✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 

Varma et al. [23] 
Qin et al. [24] 
Musa et al. [25] 
Yim et al. [26] 
Hu et al. [27] 
Poulose et al. [28] 
Barsocchi et al. [29] 
Kothari et al. [30] 
Wu et al. [31] 
Gu et al. [32] 
Rafferty et al. [43] 
Ozcan et al. [44] 
Khan et al. [45] 
Cahoolessur et al. [46] 
Godfrey et al. [47] 
Liu et al. [48] 
Dinh et al. [49,50] 
Townsend et al. [51] 
Hsu et al. [53] 
Yun et al. [54] 
Nguyen et al. [55] 
Huang et al. [56] 
Song et al. [58] 
Kim et al. [59] 
Jang et al. [60] 
Wang et al. [61] 
Qin et al. [62] 
Wietrzykowski et al. [63] 
Panja et al. [64] 
Yin et al. [65]   
Patil et al. [66]   
Gan et al. [67] 
Hoang et al. [68] 
Seçkin et al. [69] 
✓ 
Galvão et al. [70] 
✓ 
Sase et al. [71],   
✓ 
Li et al. [72],   
✓ 
Theodoridis et al. [73],   
✓ 
Abobakr et al. [74],   
✓ 
Abdo et al. [75],   
Sowmyayani et al. [76],    ✓ 
✓ 
Kalita et al. [77],   
✓ 
Soni et al. [78],   
✓ 
Serpa et al. [79], 
✓ 
Lin et al. [80] 
✓ 
Thakur et al. [84] 
Thakur et al. [85] 
Thakur et al. [this work]  ✓ 

Effective 
Hardware 
Design 
✓ 

Indoor Localization 
Effective 
Software 
Design 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 

✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 

✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 

✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 

✓ 

✓ 
✓ 

✓ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19  of  25 

4.2. Comparative Study to Uphold the Cost-Effectiveness of the System 

As discussed in Section 2, there have been a few prior works related to the develop-
ment of fall detection, indoor localization, and assisted living technologies that focused 
on real-world development and implementation. However, one of the major limitations 
of these works is the high cost (primarily cost of the underlining equipment) of the under-
lining systems, which have posed a major challenge to the wide-scale deployment of the 
same across multiple IoT-based environments. In addition to proposing a simplistic de-
sign for our system, we also aimed to address the research challenge of developing a cost-
effective system in this study. There can be multiple ways by which the cost of a system 
may be defined for  different use-case scenarios. These  could  include  the cost of equip-
ment, cost  of installation, cost  of maintenance,  the  salary of  research  personnel,  cost  of 
deployment, computational costs, etc. The cost of a system can also be defined as a com-
bination of two or more of these components. In this section, we compare the cost of our 
system with the  cost of prior  works in this field  to uphold  its cost-effective nature. All 
these types of costs, as mentioned above, could be interesting components to computer 
and/or compare. However, most of the prior works in these fields reported only the cost 
of equipment, so only the cost of necessary equipment was used as the grounds for com-
parison  in  this  comparative  study.  Furthermore,  comparing  the  cost  of  the  associated 
equipment to comment on the cost-effectiveness of the underlying system is an approach 
that  has  been  followed  by  researchers  in  the  broad  domain  of  IoT  as  can  be  seen  from 
recent works [108-111] in this field. As shown in Table 1, the cost  of equipment  for the 
development of this AAL system was USD 262.97. Table 4 shows the comparison of the 
costs of our system with prior works in this field.   

Table 4. Comparison of the costs of the proposed system with  the cost of the systems pro-
posed in prior works in this field. Here, by costs, we refer to only the cost of equipment.   
Costs (in USD) 
>$10,000 
$9,000 
$1,500.00 
$1372.49* 
$ 1,055.98* 
$1,055.98* 
$950.21* 
$844.61* 
$750.00 
$581.00 
$460.00 
$422.36* 
$262.97 

Work 
Muffert al. [37] 
Kohoutek et al. [36] 
Popescu et al. [40] 
Yun et al. [54] 
Tilch et al. [38] 
Habbecke et al. [39] 
Hsu et al. [53] 
Liu et al. [41] 
Huang et al. [56] 
Dasios et al. [57] 
Braun et al. [42] 
Nguyen et al. [55] 
Thakur et al. [this work] 

In Table 4, * denotes the USD equivalent of Euros (as per the conversion rate men-
tioned on https://www.xe.com/ on May 9, 2022). This conversion to USD was performed 
for consistency in this comparative study in terms of comparing the costs of all the systems 
in USD, as the  costs of some  of these systems [54,38,39,53,41, and 55] were reported in 
Euros in the associated publications. As can be seen from Table 4, the development and 
implementation of this proposed system involves the least cost as compared to all prior 
works  in  the  fields  of  fall  detection,  indoor  localization,  and  assisted  living,  which  in-
volved real-world development. This upholds the cost-effective nature of the proposed 
system and also illustrates the potential of the same for wide-scale real-world implemen-
tation in multiple smart homes for AAL of the elderly.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20  of  25 

5. Conclusions and Future Work 

As the population ages, modern society is facing a wide range of  difficulties stem-
ming from numerous conditions and needs associated with the elderly. Over the last few 
years, the aging populations throughout the globe have had to contend with a decrease of 
caregivers to care for them, which has created a variety of difficulties related to independ-
ence in carrying out ADLs, which are crucial for one’s sustenance. Falls are highly com-
mon in the elderly on account of the various bodily limitations, challenges, declining abil-
ities, and decreasing skills that they face with increasing age. Falls can have a variety of 
negative effects on the health, well-being, and quality of life of the elderly, including re-
stricting their capability to perform or complete ADLs. Falls can even lead to permanent 
disabilities or death in the absence of timely care and services. To detect these dynamic 
and diversified needs of the elderly that usually arise in the context of their living envi-
ronments during ADLs, tracking, and analysis of the spatial and contextual data associ-
ated with these activities, or in other words, indoor localization, becomes very crucial.   

Despite several works in the fields of fall detection and indoor localization, there exist 
multiple challenges centered around (1) lack of fall detection systems to perform indoor 
localization and vice versa; (2) high cost associated with the real-time development and 
deployment of the underlining systems; (3) complicated design paradigms of the associ-
ated systems; (4) testing of the proposed systems on datasets and lack of guidelines  for 
real-world development of the same; and (5)  the systems requiring the development of 
new devices or gadgets which in addition to being costly, pose a challenge for wide-scale 
development  and  deployment  in  multiple  real-world  settings.  To  address  these  chal-
lenges, this work proposes a cost-effective and simplistic design paradigm for an Ambient 
Assisted  Living  system  that  can  capture  multimodal  components  of  the  user  behavior 
during ADLs that are necessary for performing fall detection and indoor localization in 
the  real  world.  The  total  cost  (in  terms  of  cost  of  equipment)  for  the  development  and 
implementation of this system is $262.97, which is the least compared to the cost of prior 
works  in  the  fields  of  fall  detection,  indoor  localization,  and  assisted  living,  which  in-
volved real-world development. This upholds the cost-effective nature of the proposed 
system. The paper also presents a comprehensive comparative study with prior works in 
this field to highlight the novelty of the proposed AAL system in terms of effective soft-
ware design and hardware design. Future work would involve the recruitment of more 
volunteers  for  the  experiments  and  adding  an  additional  module  to  this  system  that 
would incorporate real-world decision-making in terms of detecting a fall and the associ-
ated indoor location of the user during ADLs.   

Author Contributions: Conceptualization, NT; methodology, NT; software, NT; validation, NT; for-
mal analysis, NT; investigation, NT; resources, NT; data curation, NT; visualization, NT; data anal-
ysis and results, NT; writing—original draft preparation, NT; writing—review and editing, NT; su-
pervision, CYH; project administration, CYH; funding acquisition, Not Applicable. All authors have 
read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript. 

Funding: This research received no external funding 

Institutional  Review Board  Statement:  The  study,  with  IRB  ID  2019-1026,  was approved  by the 
University of Cincinnati’s Institutional Review Board (IRB) with IRB Registration#: 00000180 and 
FWA #: 000003152.   

Informed Consent Statement:  All subjects gave their informed consent for inclusion before they 
participated in the study. 

Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study are available on request from the 
corresponding author.   

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. 

 
 
 
 
21  of  25 

References 
1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

6. 

Zhavoronkov,  A.;  Bischof,  E.;  Lee,  K.-F.  Artificial  Intelligence  in  Longevity  Medicine.  Nat  Aging  2021,  1,  5–7, 
doi:10.1038/s43587-020-00020-4. 
Decade  of  Healthy  Ageing  (2021-2030)  Available  online:  https://www.who.int/initiatives/decade-of-healthy-ageing  (ac-
cessed on 9 May 2022). 
Ageing and Health Available online: https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/ageing-and-health (accessed on 
9 May 2022). 
Remillard, E.T.; Campbell, M.L.; Koon, L.M.; Rogers, W.A. Transportation Challenges for Persons Aging with Mobility 
Disability: Qualitative Insights and Policy Implications. Disabil. Health J. 2022, 15, 101209, doi:10.1016/j.dhjo.2021.101209. 
5.  Wu,  C.H.; Lam,  C.H.Y.;  Xhafa,  F.;  Tang,  V.;  Ip,  W.H.  The  Vision  of the  Healthcare  Industry  for  Supporting the  Aging 
Population. In Lecture Notes on Data Engineering and Communications Technologies; Springer International Publishing: 
Cham, 2022; pp. 5–15 ISBN 9783030933869. 
Yang, W.; Wu, B.; Tan, S.Y.; Li, B.; Lou, V.W.Q.; Chen, Z.A.; Chen, X.; Fletcher, J.R.; Carrino, L.; Hu, B.; et al. Understanding 
Health  and  Social  Challenges  for  Aging  and  Long-Term  Care 
in  China.  Res.  Aging  2021,  43,  127–135, 
doi:10.1177/0164027520938764. 
Abdul  Rehman  Javed,  Labiba  Gillani Fahad,  Asma  Ahmad  Farhan,  Sidra  Abbas  ,  Gautam  Srivastava,  Reza  M.  Parizi, 
Mohammad S. Khang Automated Cognitive Health Assessment in Smart Homes Using Machine Learning. Sustainable 
Cities and Society 2021, 65, doi:10.1016/j.scs.2020.102572. 
Zielonka, A.; Wozniak, M.; Garg, S.; Kaddoum, G.; Piran, MJ; Muhammad, G. Smart Homes: How Much Will They Sup-
port Us? A Research on Recent Trends and Advances. IEEE Access 2021, 9, 26388–26419, doi:10.1109/access.2021.3054575. 
Cicirelli, G.; Marani, R.; Petitti, A.; Milella, A.; D’Orazio, T. Ambient Assisted Living: A Review of Technologies, Method-
ologies and Future Perspectives for Healthy Aging of Population. Sensors (Basel) 2021, 21, 3549, doi:10.3390/s21103549. 
Pappadà,  A.;  Chattat,  R.;  Chirico,  I.;  Valente,  M.;  Ottoboni,  G.  Assistive  Technologies  in  Dementia  Care:  An  Updated 
Analysis of the Literature. Front. Psychol. 2021, 12, 644587, doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2021.644587. 

10. 

7. 

9. 

8. 

11.  Appeadu, M.K.; Bordoni, B. Falls and Fall Prevention in the Elderly. In StatPearls [Internet]; StatPearls Publishing, 2022. 
12.  Nahian, M.J.A.; Ghosh, T.; Banna, MHA; Aseeri, M.A.; Uddin, M.N.; Ahmed, M.R.; Mahmud, M.; Kaiser, M.S. Towards 
an Accelerometer-Based Elderly Fall Detection System Using Cross-Disciplinary Time Series Features. IEEE Access unde-
fined 2021, 9, 39413–39431, doi:10.1109/access.2021.3056441. 

13.  Wang,  X.;  Ellul,  J.;  Azzopardi,  G.  Elderly  Fall  Detection  Systems:  A  Literature  Survey.  Front.  Robot.  AI  2020,  7,  71, 

14. 

doi:10.3389/frobt.2020.00071. 
Lezzar, F.; Benmerzoug, D.; Kitouni, I. Camera-Based Fall Detection System for the Elderly with Occlusion Recognition. 
Applied Medical Informatics; Cluj-Napoca 2020, 42, 169–179. 

15.  C.D.C. Keep on Your Feet—Preventing Older Adult Falls  Available online: https://www.cdc.gov/injury/features/older-

16. 

adult-falls/index.html (accessed on 9 May 2022). 
The National Council on Aging Available online: https://www.ncoa.org/news/resources-for-reporters/get-the-facts/falls-
prevention-facts/ (accessed on 9 May 2022). 
Facts about Falls Available online: https://www.cdc.gov/homeandrecreationalsafety/falls/adultfalls.html (accessed on 9 
May 2022). 
18.  Older  Adult 

https://www.cdc.gov/homeandrecreational-

State  Available 

online: 

17. 

by 

Falls  Reported 
safety/falls/data/fallcost.html (accessed on 9 May 2022). 

19.  Mubashir, M.; Shao, L.; Seed, L. A Survey on Fall Detection: Principles and Approaches. Neurocomputing 2013, 100, 144–

20. 

152, doi:10.1016/j.neucom.2011.09.037. 
Langlois, C.; Tiku, S.; Pasricha, S. Indoor Localization with Smartphones: Harnessing the Sensor Suite in Your Pocket. 
IEEE consum. electron. mag. 2017, 6, 70–80, doi:10.1109/mce.2017.2714719. 

21.  Zafari, F.; Papapanagiotou, I.; Devetsikiotis, M.; Hacker, T. An IBeacon Based Proximity and Indoor Localization System. 

arXiv [cs.NI] 2017, doi:10.48550/ARXIV.1703.07876. 

22.  Dardari, D.; Closas, P.; Djuric, P.M. Indoor Tracking: Theory, Methods, and Technologies. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 2015, 

64, 1263–1278, doi:10.1109/tvt.2015.2403868. 

23.  Varma, P.S.; Anand, V. Random Forest Learning Based Indoor Localization as an IoT Service for Smart Buildings. Wirel. 

Pers. Commun. 2021, 117, 3209–3227, doi:10.1007/s11277-020-07977-w. 

24.  Qin, F.; Zuo, T.; Wang, X. CCpos: WiFi Fingerprint Indoor Positioning System Based on CDAE-CNN. Sensors (Basel) 2021, 

21, 1114, doi:10.3390/s21041114. 

25.  Musa, A.; Nugraha, G.D.; Han, H.; Choi, D.; Seo, S.; Kim, J. A Decision Tree-Based NLOS Detection Method for the UWB 
Indoor Location Tracking Accuracy Improvement: Decision-Tree NLOS Detection for the UWB Indoor Location Tracking. 
Int. J. Commun. Syst. 2019, 32, e3997, doi:10.1002/dac.3997. 

26.  Yim,  J.  Introducing  a  Decision  Tree-Based  Indoor  Positioning  Technique.  Expert  Syst.  Appl.  2008,  34,  1296–1302, 

doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2006.12.028. 

27.  Hu, J.; Liu, D.; Yan, Z.; Liu, H. Experimental Analysis on Weight <inline-Formula> K </Inline-Formula>-Nearest Neighbor 

28. 

Indoor Fingerprint Positioning. IEEE Internet Things J. 2019, 6, 891–897, doi:10.1109/jiot.2018.2864607. 
Poulose, A.; Han, D.S. Hybrid Deep Learning Model Based Indoor Positioning Using WI-Fi RSSI Heat Maps for Autono-
mous Applications. Electronics (Basel) 2020, 10, 2, doi:10.3390/electronics10010002. 

 
 
22  of  25 

29. 

Barsocchi, P.; Lenzi, S.; Chessa, S.; Furfari, F. Automatic Virtual Calibration of Range-Based Indoor Localization Systems. 
Wirel. Commun. Mob. Comput. 2012, 12, 1546–1557, doi:10.1002/wcm.1085. 

30.  Kothari, N.; Kannan, B.; Glasgwow, E.D.; Dias, M.B. Robust Indoor Localization on a Commercial Smart Phone. Procedia 

Comput. Sci. 2012, 10, 1114–1120, doi:10.1016/j.procs.2012.06.158. 

31.  Wu, C.; Yang, Z.; Liu, Y. Smartphones Based Crowdsourcing for Indoor Localization. IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput. 2015, 14, 

444–457, doi:10.1109/tmc.2014.2320254. 

32.  Gu, F.; Khoshelham, K.; Shang, J.; Yu, F.; Wei, Z. Robust and Accurate Smartphone-Based Step Counting for Indoor Lo-

calization. IEEE Sens. J. 2017, 17, 3453–3460, doi:10.1109/jsen.2017.2685999. 

33.  Dombroski, C.E.; Balsdon, M.E.R.; Froats, A. The Use of a Low Cost 3D Scanning and Printing Tool in the Manufacture of 

34. 

Custom-Made Foot Orthoses: A Preliminary Study. B.M.C. Res. Notes 2014, 7, 443, doi:10.1186/1756-0500-7-443. 
Ichikari, R.; Kaji, K.; Shimomura, R.; Kourogi, M.; Okuma, T.; Kurata, T. Off-Site Indoor Localization Competitions Based 
on Measured Data in a Warehouse. Sensors (Basel) 2019, 19, 763, doi:10.3390/s19040763. 
35. 
Lemic, F.; Handziski, V.; Wolisz, A. D4.3b Report on the Cooperation with EvAAL and Microsoft/IPSN Initiatives; 
36.  Kohoutek, T.K.; Mautz, R.; Donaubauer, A. Real-Time Indoor Positioning Using Range Imaging Sensors. In Proceedings 
of the Real-Time Image and Video Processing 2010; Kehtarnavaz, N., Carlsohn, M.F., Eds.; SPIE, 2010; Vol. 7724, p. 77240K. 
37.  Muffert, M.; Siegemund, J.; Förstner, W. The Estimation of Spatial Positions by Using an Omnidirectional Camera System. 
In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Machine Control & Guidance, March 9¬-11, 2010; Bonn, Germany, 
2010; pp. 96–104. 
Tilch, S.; Mautz, R. DEVELOPMENT OF A NEW LASER-BASED, OPTICAL INDOOR POSITIONING SYSTEM. Interna-
tional Archives of Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Vol. XXXVIII, Part 5 Commission 
V Symposium, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK 2010. 

38. 

40. 

39.  Habbecke, M.; Kobbelt, L. Laser Brush: A Flexible Device for 3D Reconstruction of Indoor Scenes. In Proceedings of the 
Proceedings of the 2008 ACM symposium on Solid and physical modeling - SPM ’08; ACM Press: New York, New York, 
U.S.A., 2008. 
Popescu, V.; Sacks, E.; Bahmutov, G. Interactive Modeling from  Dense Color and Sparse Depth. In Proceedings of the 
Proceedings. 2nd International Symposium on 3D Data Processing, Visualization and Transmission, 2004. 3DPVT 2004; 
IEEE, 2004; pp. 430–437. 
Liu, W.; Hu, C.; He, Q.; Meng, M.Q.-H.; Liu, L. An Hybrid Localization System Based on Optics and Magnetics. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2010 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics; IEEE, 2010; pp. 1165–1169. 
Braun, A.; Dutz, T. Low-Cost Indoor Localization Using Cameras – Evaluating AmbiTrack and Its Applications in Ambi-
ent Assisted Living. J. Ambient Intell. Smart Environ. 2016, 8, 243–258, doi:10.3233/ais-160377. 

42. 

41. 

43.  Rafferty, J.; Synnott, J.; Nugent, C.; Morrison, G.; Tamburini, E. Fall Detection through Thermal Vision Sensing. In Ubiq-
uitous  Computing  and  Ambient  Intelligence;  Springer  International  Publishing:  Cham,  2016;  pp.  84–90  ISBN 
9783319487984. 

44.  Ozcan, K.; Velipasalar, S.; Varshney, PK Autonomous Fall Detection with Wearable Cameras by Using Relative Entropy 

Distance Measure. IEEE Trans. Hum. Mach. Syst. 2016, 47, 1–9, doi:10.1109/thms.2016.2620904. 

45.  Khan, S.; Qamar, R.; Zaheen, R.; Al-Ali, A.R.; Al Nabulsi, A.; Al-Nashash, H. Internet of Things Based Multi-Sensor Patient 

Fall Detection System. Healthc. Technol. Lett. 2019, 6, 132–137, doi:10.1049/htl.2018.5121. 

46.  Cahoolessur, D.K.; Rajkumarsingh, B. Fall Detection System Using XGBoost and IoT. R&D j. 2020, 36, doi:10.17159/2309-

8988/2020/v36a2. 

47.  Godfrey, A.; Bourke, A.; Del Din, S.; Morris, R.; Hickey, A.; Helbostad, J.L.; Rochester, L. Towards Holistic Free-Living 
Assessment in Parkinson’s Disease: Unification of Gait and Fall Algorithms with a Single Accelerometer. Annu Int Conf 
IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc 2016, 2016, 651–654, doi:10.1109/EMBC.2016.7590786. 
Liu, L.; Popescu, M.; Skubic, M.; Rantz, M. An Automatic Fall Detection Framework Using Data Fusion of Doppler Radar 
IEEE  Eng  Med  Biol  Soc  2014,  2014,  5940–5943, 
and  Motion  Sensor  Network.  Annu 
doi:10.1109/EMBC.2014.6944981. 

Int  Conf 

48. 

49.  Dinh, A.; Shi, Y.; Teng, D.; Ralhan, A.; Chen, L.; Dal Bello-Haas, V.; Basran, J.; Ko, S.-B.; McCrowsky, C. A Fall and Near-

Fall Assessment and Evaluation System. Open Biomed. Eng. J. 2009, 3, 1–7, doi:10.2174/1874120700903010001. 

50.  Dinh, A.; Teng, D.; Chen, L.; Ko, SB; Shi, Y.; Basran, J.; Del Bello-Hass, V. Data Acquisition System Using Six Degree-of-
Freedom Inertia Sensor and ZigBee Wireless Link for Fall Detection and Prevention. Annu Int Conf IEEE Eng Med Biol 
Soc 2008, 2008, 2353–2356, doi:10.1109/IEMBS.2008.4649671. 
Townsend, D.I.; Goubran, R.; Frize, M.; Knoefel, F. Preliminary Results on the Effect of Sensor Position on Unobtrusive 
Rollover Detection for Sleep Monitoring in Smart Homes. Annu Int Conf IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc 2009, 2009, 6135–6138, 
doi:10.1109/IEMBS.2009.5334690. 

51. 

52.  Cordes, A.; Pollig, D.; Leonhardt, S. Comparison of Different Coil Positions for Ventilation Monitoring with Contact-Less 

Magnetic Impedance Measurements. J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 2010, 224, 012144, doi:10.1088/1742-6596/224/1/012144. 

53.  Hsu, Y.-W.; Perng, J.-W.; Liu, H.-L. Development of a Vision Based Pedestrian Fall Detection System with Back Propaga-
tion Neural Network. In Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE/SICE International Symposium on System Integration (SII); IEEE, 
2015; pp. 433–437. 

54.  Yun, Y.; Gu, I.Y.-H. Human Fall Detection in Videos via Boosting and Fusing Statistical Features of Appearance, Shape 
and Motion Dynamics on Riemannian Manifolds with Applications to Assisted Living. Comput. Vis. Image Underst. 2016, 
148, 111–122, doi:10.1016/j.cviu.2015.12.002. 

 
 
23  of  25 

55.  Nguyen, H.T.K.; Fahama, H.; Belleudy, C.; Van Pham, T. Low Power Architecture Exploration for Standalone Fall Detec-
tion System Based on Computer Vision. In Proceedings of the 2014 European Modelling Symposium; IEEE, 2014; pp. 169–
173. 

56.  Huang, Y.; Newman, K. Improve Quality of Care with Remote Activity and Fall Detection Using Ultrasonic Sensors. Annu 

Int Conf IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc 2012, 2012, 5854–5857, doi:10.1109/EMBC.2012.6347325. 

57.  Dasios, A.; Gavalas, D.; Pantziou, G.; Konstantopoulos, C. Hands-on Experiences in Deploying Cost-Effective Ambient-

58. 

Assisted Living Systems. Sensors (Basel) 2015, 15, 14487–14512, doi:10.3390/s150614487. 
Song, X.; Fan, X.; He, X.; Xiang, C.; Ye, Q.; Huang, X.; Fang, G.; Chen, L.L.; Qin, J.; Wang, Z. CNNLoc: Deep-Learning 
Based Indoor Localization with WiFi Fingerprinting. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE SmartWorld, Ubiquitous Intelligence 
& Computing, Advanced & Trusted Computing, Scalable Computing & Communications, Cloud & Big Data Computing, 
Internet  of  People  and  Smart  City  Innovation  (SmartWorld/SCALCOM/UIC/ATC/CBDCom/IOP/SCI);  IEEE,  2019;  pp. 
589–595. 

59.  Kim, K.S.; Lee, S.; Huang, K. A Scalable Deep Neural Network Architecture for Multi-Building and Multi-Floor Indoor 

60. 

Localization Based on WiFi Fingerprinting. Big Data Anal. 2018, 3, doi:10.1186/s41044-018-0031-2. 
Jang, J.-W.; Hong, S.-N. Indoor Localization with WiFi Fingerprinting Using Convolutional Neural Network. In Proceed-
ings of the 2018 Tenth International Conference on Ubiquitous and Future Networks (ICUFN); IEEE, 2018; pp. 753–758. 

61.  Wang, L.; Tiku, S.; Pasricha, S. CHISEL: Compression-Aware High-Accuracy Embedded Indoor Localization with Deep 

Learning. IEEE Embed. Syst. Lett. 2022, 14, 23–26, doi:10.1109/les.2021.3094965. 

62.  Qin, F.; Zuo, T.; Wang, X. CCpos: WiFi Fingerprint Indoor Positioning System Based on CDAE-CNN. Sensors (Basel) 2021, 

21, 1114, doi:10.3390/s21041114. 

63.  Wietrzykowski, J.; Nowicki, M.; Skrzypczyński, P. Adopting the FAB-MAP Algorithm for Indoor Localization with WiFi 
Fingerprints. In Automation 2017; Springer International Publishing: Cham, 2017; pp. 585–594 ISBN 9783319540412. 
Panja, A.K.; Karim, S.F.; Neogy, S.; Chowdhury, C. A Novel Feature Based Ensemble Learning Model for Indoor Locali-
zation of Smartphone Users. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 2022, 107, 104538, doi:10.1016/j.engappai.2021.104538. 

64. 

65.  Yin, L.; Ma, P.; Deng, Z. JLGBMLoc-A Novel High-Precision Indoor Localization Method Based on LightGBM. Sensors 

66. 

(Basel) 2021, 21, 2722, doi:10.3390/s21082722. 
Patil, M.; Wang, X.; Wang, X.; Mao, S. Adversarial Attacks on Deep Learning-Based Floor Classification and Indoor Lo-
calization.  In  Proceedings  of  the  Proceedings  of the  3rd  ACM  Workshop  on  Wireless  Security  and  Machine  Learning; 
ACM: New York, NY, USA, 2021. 

67.  Gan, H.; Khir, M.H.B.M.; Witjaksono Bin Djaswadi, G.; Ramli, N. A Hybrid Model Based on Constraint OSELM, Adaptive 
Weighted  SRC  and  KNN  for  Large-Scale  Indoor  Localization.  IEEE  Access  2019,  7,  6971–6989,  doi:10.1109/ac-
cess.2018.2890111. 

68.  Hoang, M.T.; Yuen, B.; Dong, X.; Lu, T.; Westendorp, R.; Reddy, K. Recurrent Neural Networks for Accurate RSSI Indoor 

69. 

Localization. IEEE Internet Things J. 2019, 6, 10639–10651, doi:10.1109/jiot.2019.2940368. 
Seçkin, A.Ç.; Coşkun, A. Hierarchical Fusion of Machine Learning Algorithms in Indoor Positioning and Localization. 
Appl. Sci. (Basel) 2019, 9, 3665, doi:10.3390/app9183665. 

70.  Galvão, Y.M.; Ferreira, J.; Albuquerque, V.A.; Barros, P.; Fernandes, B.J.T. A Multimodal Approach Using Deep Learning 

71. 

72. 

73. 

for Fall Detection. Expert Syst. Appl. 2021, 168, 114226, doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2020.114226. 
Sase, PS; Bhandari, S.H. Human Fall Detection Using Depth Videos. In Proceedings of the 2018 5th International Confer-
ence on Signal Processing and Integrated Networks (SPIN); IEEE, 2018; pp. 546–549. 
Li,  H.;  Li,  C.;  Ding,  Y.  Fall  Detection  Based  on  Fused  Saliency  Maps.  Multimed.  Tools  Appl.  2021,  80,  1883–1900, 
doi:10.1007/s11042-020-09708-6. 
Theodoridis, T.; Solachidis, V.; Vretos, N.; Daras, P. Human Fall Detection from Acceleration Measurements Using a Re-
current Neural Network. In Precision Medicine Powered by pHealth and Connected Health; Springer Singapore: Singa-
pore, 2018; pp. 145–149 ISBN 9789811074189. 

74.  Abobakr, A.; Hossny, M.; Abdelkader, H.; Nahavandi, S. RGB-D Fall Detection via Deep Residual Convolutional LSTM 
Networks. In Proceedings of the 2018 Digital Image Computing: Techniques and Applications (DICTA); IEEE, 2018; pp. 
1–7. 

75.  Abdo, H.; Amin, K.M.; Hamad, A.M. Fall Detection Based on RetinaNet and MobileNet Convolutional Neural Networks. 
In Proceedings of the 2020 15th International Conference on Computer Engineering and Systems (ICCES); IEEE, 2020; pp. 
1–7. 
Sowmyayani, S.; Murugan, V.; Kavitha, J. Fall Detection in Elderly Care System Based on Group of Pictures. Vietnam J. 
Comput. Sci. 2021, 08, 199–214, doi:10.1142/s2196888821500081. 

76. 

78. 

77.  Kalita, S.; Karmakar, A.; Hazarika, SM Human Fall Detection during Activities of Daily Living Using Extended CORE9. 
In Proceedings of the 2019 Second International Conference on Advanced Computational and Communication Paradigms 
(ICACCP); IEEE, 2019; pp. 1–6. 
Soni, P.K.; Choudhary, A. Automated Fall Detection from a Camera Using Support Vector Machine. In Proceedings of the 
2019  Second  International  Conference  on  Advanced  Computational  and  Communication  Paradigms  (ICACCP);  IEEE, 
2019; pp. 1–6. 
Serpa, Y.R.; Nogueira, M.B.; Neto, P.P.M.; Rodrigues, M.A.F. Evaluating Pose Estimation as a Solution to the Fall Detection 
Problem. In Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE 8th International Conference on Serious Games and Applications for Health 
(SeGAH); IEEE, 2020; pp. 1–7. 

79. 

 
 
80. 

Lin,  C.-B.;  Dong,  Z.;  Kuan,  W.-K.;  Huang,  Y.-F.  A  Framework  for  Fall  Detection  Based  on  OpenPose  Skeleton  and 
LSTM/GRU Models. Appl. Sci. (Basel) 2020, 11, 329, doi:10.3390/app11010329. 

81.  Arthanat, S.; Wilcox, J.; Macuch, M. Profiles and Predictors of Smart Home Technology Adoption by Older Adults. OTJR 

(Thorofare N J) 2019, 39, 247–256, doi:10.1177/1539449218813906. 

82.  Gray, J.; Helland, P.; O’Neil, P.; Shasha, D. The Dangers of Replication and a Solution. In Proceedings of the Proceedings 
of the 1996 ACM SIGMOD international conference on Management of data - SIGMOD ’96; ACM Press: New York, New 
York, U.S.A., 1996. 

24  of  25 

84. 

83.  Wentzel, J.; Velleman, E.; van der Geest, T. Wearables for All: Development of Guidelines to Stimulate Accessible Weara-
ble Technology Design. In Proceedings of the Proceedings of the 13th International Web for All Conference; ACM: New 
York, NY, USA, 2016. 
Thakur,  N.;  Han,  C.Y.  A  Study  of  Fall  Detection  in  Assisted  Living:  Identifying  and  Improving  the  Optimal  Machine 
Learning Method. J. Sens. Actuator Netw. 2021, 10, 39, doi:10.3390/jsan10030039. 
Thakur,  N.;  Han,  C.Y.  Multimodal  Approaches  for  Indoor  Localization  for  Ambient  Assisted  Living  in  Smart  Homes. 
Information (Basel) 2021, 12, 114, doi:10.3390/info12030114. 
Shaeffer,  D.K.  MEMS 
doi:10.1109/mcom.2013.6495768. 

IEEE  Commun.  Mag.  2013,  51,  100–109, 

Inertial  Sensors:  A  Tutorial  Overview. 

86. 

85. 

87.  Kaluža, B.; Mirchevska, V.; Dovgan, E.; Luštrek, M.; Gams, M. An Agent-Based Approach to Care in Independent Living. 
In  Lecture  Notes  in  Computer  Science;  Springer  Berlin  Heidelberg:  Berlin,  Heidelberg,  2010;  pp.  177–186  ISBN 
9783642169168. 
Tabbakha, N.E. A Dataset for Elderly Action Recognition Using Indoor Location and Activity Tracking Data 2020. 
Saguna, S.; Zaslavsky, A.; Chakraborty, D. Complex Activity Recognition Using Context-Driven Activity Theory and Ac-
tivity Signatures. ACM Trans. Comput. Hum. Interact. 2013, 20, 1–34, doi:10.1145/2490832. 
The Imou Bullet 2S Smart Camera Available online: http://://www.imoulife.com/product/detail/Bullet2S (accessed on 9 
May 2022). 

88. 
89. 

90. 

91.  Velcro Sleeve Kit for MMC and MMR Available online: https://mbientlab.com/store/sleeve-sensor-research-kit (accessed 

on 9 May 2022). 
Estimote SpaceTimeOS Available online: https://estimote.com/ (accessed on 9 May 2022). 

92. 
93.  Microsoft SQL Server Versions List Available online: https://sqlserverbuilds.blogspot.com/ (accessed on 9 May 2022). 
94.  Available  online:  https://researchhow2.uc.edu/docs/default-source/default-document-library/citi-affiliation-guide.pdf 

(accessed on 9 May 2022). 

95.  University  of  Cincinnati-IT@UC  Institutional  Review  Board  Available  online:  https://research.uc.edu/support/of-

fices/hrpp/irb (accessed on 9 May 2022). 

96.  Gjoreski, H.; Lustrek, M.; Gams, M. Accelerometer Placement for Posture Recognition and Fall Detection. In Proceedings 

97. 

of the 2011 Seventh International Conference on Intelligent Environments; IEEE, 2011; pp. 47–54. 
Brown, B.; Reeves, S.; Sherwood, S. Into the Wild: Challenges and Opportunities for Field Trial Methods. In Proceedings 
of the Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems; ACM: New York, NY, USA, 2011. 

98.  Velavan, T.P.; Meyer, C.G. The COVID-19 Epidemic. Trop. Med. Int. Health 2020, 25, 278–280, doi:10.1111/tmi.13383. 
99. 

Lucia  Bragg/Bakara  Johnson,  L.K.  President  Trump  Declares  State  of  Emergency  for  COVID-19  Available  online: 
https://www.ncsl.org/ncsl-in-dc/publications-and-resources/president-trump-declares-state-of-emergency-for-covid-
19.aspx (accessed on 9 May 2022). 

100.  COVID Live - Coronavirus Statistics - Worldometer Available online: https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/ (ac-

cessed on 9 May 2022). 

101.  Available online: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prepare/transmission.html (accessed on 10 May 2022). 
102.  University  of  Cincinnati-IT@UC  Coronavirus  Impacts  Return  to  On-Campus  Research  Available  online:  https://re-

search.uc.edu/coronavirus-impacts-return-to-on-campus-research (accessed on 10 May 2022). 

103.  Mierswa, I.; Wurst, M.; Klinkenberg, R.; Scholz, M.; Euler, T. YALE: Rapid Prototyping for Complex Data Mining Tasks. 
In Proceedings of the Proceedings of the 12th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data 
mining - KDD ’06; ACM Press: New York, New York, U.S.A., 2006. 

104.  Sen, S.; Chakraborty, D.; Subbaraju, V.; Banerjee, D.; Misra, A.; Banerjee, N.; Mittal, S. Accommodating User Diversity for 
In-Store Shopping Behavior Recognition. In Proceedings of the Proceedings of the 2014 ACM International Symposium 
on Wearable Computers - ISWC ’14; ACM Press: New York, New York, USA, 2014. 

105.  Coskun,  A.;  Erbug,  C.  User  Diversity  in  Design  for  Behavior  Change.  In  Proceedings  of  the  DRS  Biennial  Conference 

Series; 2014. 

106.  Paul, A.; Ahmad, A.; Rathore, MM; Jabbar, S. Smartbuddy: Defining Human Behaviors Using Big Data Analytics in Social 

Internet of Things. IEEE Wirel. Commun. 2016, 23, 68–74, doi:10.1109/mwc.2016.7721744. 

107.  Thakur,  N.;  Han,  C.Y.  Towards  a  Knowledge  Base  for  Activity  Recognition  of  Diverse  Users.  In  Human  Interaction, 
Emerging Technologies and Future Applications III; Springer International Publishing: Cham, 2021; pp. 303–308 ISBN 
9783030553067. 

108.  Rony, J.H.; Karim, N.; Rouf, M.D.A.; Islam, M.M.; Uddin, J.; Begum, M. A Cost-Effective IoT Model for a Smart Sewerage 

Management System Using Sensors. J 2021, 4, 356–366, doi:10.3390/j4030027. 

109.  Vikram, N.; Harish, K.S.; Nihaal, M.S.; Umesh, R.; Kumar, S.A.A. A Low Cost Home Automation System Using WI-Fi 
Based Wireless Sensor Network Incorporating Internet of Things (IoT). In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE 7th International 
Advance Computing Conference (IACC); IEEE, 2017; pp. 174–178. 

 
 
110.  Sengupta, A.; Debnath, B.; Das, A.; De, D. FarmFox: A Quad-Sensor-Based IoT Box for Precision Agriculture. IEEE con-

sum. electron. mag. 2021, 10, 63–68, doi:10.1109/mce.2021.3064818. 

111.  Ogu, R.E.; Chukwudebe, G.A. Development of a Cost-Effective Electricity Theft Detection and Prevention System Based 
on  IoT  Technology.  In  Proceedings  of the 2017  IEEE  3rd  International  Conference  on  Electro-Technology  for  National 
Development (NIGERCON); IEEE, 2017; pp. 756–760. 

25  of  25 

 
 
 
 
 
