2
2
0
2

l
u
J

8
2

]

M

I
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
8
1
3
4
1
.
7
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

The inside-out, upside-down telescope: the Argus Array’s new
pseudofocal design

Nicholas Lawa, Alan Vasquez Sotoa, Hank Corbetta, Nathan Gallihera, Ramses Gonzaleza,
Lawrence Machiaa, and Glenn Waltersb

aDepartment of Physics and Astronomy, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, NC 27599-3255, USA
bDepartment of Applied Physical Sciences, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, NC 27599-3255, USA

ABSTRACT

The Argus Optical Array will be the ﬁrst all-sky, arcsecond-resolution, 5-m class telescope. The 55 GPix Array,
currently being prototyped, will consist of 900 telescopes with 61 MPix very-low-noise CMOS detectors enabling
sub-second cadences. Argus will observe every part of the northern sky for 6-12 hours per night, achieving a
simultaneously high-cadence and deep-sky survey. The array will build a two-color, million-epoch movie, reaching
dark-sky depths of mg=19.6 each minute and mg=23.6 each week over 47% of the entire sky, enabling the most-
sensitive-yet searches for high-speed transients, gravitational-wave counterparts, exoplanet microlensing events, and
a host of other phenomena. In this paper we present our newly-developed array arrangement, which mounts all
telescopes into the inside of a hemispherical bowl (turning the original dome design inside-out). The telescopes’
beams thus converge at a single “pseudofocal” point. When placed along the telescope’s polar axis, this point
does not move as the telescope tracks, allowing every telescope to simultaneously look through a single, unmoving
window in a ﬁxed enclosure. This telescope bowl is suspended from a simple free-swinging pivot (turning the usual
telescope mounting support upside-down), with polar alignment aﬀorded by the creation of a virtual polar axis
deﬁned by a second mounting pivot. This new design, currently being prototyped with the 38-telescope Argus
Pathﬁnder, eliminates the need for a movable external dome and thus greatly reduces the cost and complexity of
the full Argus Array. Coupled with careful software scope control and the use of existing software pipelines, the
Argus Array could thus become one of the deepest and fastest sky surveys, within a midscale-level budget.

1. INTRODUCTION

Time-domain sky surveys1–11 are generally designed to enable a range of cadences, between deep-drilling small
ﬁelds for rapid transients, through to tiling the sky over multi-night periods. As large-scale detectors have be-
come available, the sky coverage of individual telescopes has increased, allowing deep-drilling strategies to cover
increasingly large sky areas in single shots (e.g. the TESS12 survey). Recently, the availability of mass-produced
wide-ﬁeld telescopes and new low-cost, low-noise, high-pixel-count sensors has enabled this strategy to be taken to
the extreme: large telescope arrays that cover the entire sky in every exposure, co-adding those images over very
long periods to achieve depth, and thus simultaneously achieving a high-cadence and deep survey over very large
sky areas.13–15

The Argus Array15 is designed to cover an 8,000 square degree ﬁeld of view with 1.4”/pixel sampling, a total
of 55 GPix (Table 1). The array will consist of 900 individual telescopes, with 61 Mpix ultra-low-noise CMOS
detectors capable of observing cadences as short as one second. With maximum data rates of 110GB/sec, only
reduced portions of the data can be stored for oﬄine analysis. The Argus-HDPS (Hierarchical Data Processing
system; Corbett et al. 2022 [these proceedings]) is designed for realtime data analysis on an array of GPUs, with
all-sky continuous sequences of hundreds or thousands of images allowing strong rejection of signals from satellite
constellations such as Starlink. We are currently prototyping the Argus Array software and hardware in a series of
systems. The largest, the 38-telescope Argus Pathﬁnder, will shortly begin full science operations.

Once constructed, however, a 900-telescope array will be among the most complex astronomical instruments
yet built. A conventional design, an array of small groups of telescopes on many mounts, leads to thousands of
exposed moving parts and optical components, and thus extreme maintenance requirements and costs compared to a
monolithic telescope on the same large scale. Argus is designed to dramatically reduce operations and maintenance

Further author information: N.M.L. E-mail: nmlaw@physics.unc.edu

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. A conceptual overview of the Argus Array pseudofocal mechanical structure. The dome window is placed at the
convergence point of the telescopes and does not require movement as the system tracks. A pickup truck is included for
scale.

costs by mounting the entire telescope array inside a lab-like environment, reducing the number of moving parts
to just a few, and protecting all the optics within a clean, thermally stable, sealed enclosure. Our original design
for the Argus Array achieved this by mounting the telescopes looking out from a hemispherical dome.15 Although
this greatly reduced complexity and cost compared to a conventional telescope array by requiring only one tracking
mount, it still required one external window per telescope, and the entire dome was required to move to track the
sky.

During the Argus conceptual design phase, we developed an alternative “inside-out” concept, where the tele-
scopes are mounted to the inside of a hemispherical bowl (Figure 1), causing a convergence of the telescope beams
at the center of the hemisphere. This point looks somewhat like a focus in ray diagrams, as the light rays come
together at that position. All beams entering the telescopes, however, are naturally collimated direct from the sky,
and this point is just a optically-unimportant convergence we have dubbed the “pseudofocus”. The convergence
point is an area of physical space through which all the telescopes beams pass that can have an area two orders of
magnitude smaller than the telescope array itself (Figures 1, 2). A single small window placed at that location in
a ﬁxed building can therefore protect all the telescopes simultaneously.

Furthermore, the system can be arranged such that this window (and thus the enclosure to which it is mounted)
remains ﬁxed as the array tracks the sky. Tracking, without causing image rotation, requires rotating the array
around an axis parallel to the Earth’s rotation axis. If we arrange the array geometry such that the window is along
this rotation axis (Figure 2), the window can remain ﬁxed in place during tracking (at least for the small tracking
motions required for a full-sky array). By eliminating all external moving parts, this greatly simpliﬁes the telescope
enclosure compared to a conventional design: it becomes simply a building with a skylight.

The polar axis geometry aﬀords an opportunity to track the entire telescope array by swinging it from two
pivots along the axis (also shown in Figure 2). This arrangement, upside-down compared to most telescope mounts,
allows the large majority of the array weight to be supported by an oﬀ-the-shelf industrial ball-joint pivot, while
the other much-smaller pivot maintains precision polar alignment.

In this paper we present an overview of the qualitative design considerations for a pseudofocal telescope array.
The detailed Argus Array hardware and design is further explored in a series of papers in these proceedings.
Corbett et al. 2022a details the rapid prototyping of the Argus core technologies in the Argus Array Technology
Demonstrator (A2TD). The development of the Argus subsystems are covered in individual papers, including the
A2TD mount (Gonzalez et al. 2022); the telescope array packing and ﬁeld-of-view optimization (Galliher et al.
2022); the tracking and polar alignment system (Vasquez Soto et al. 2022); and the thermal and dome-seeing
control system (Machia et al. 2022). Corbett et al. 2022b describes the Argus data processing pipelines and their
development status. In this paper, we discuss the geometry required to achieve a single ﬁxed window (Section 2.1),

Figure 2. A simpliﬁed side-view of the main elements of a pseudofocal tracking array. The telescope beams converge at
a window located along the polar axis of the system, which thus need not move during tracking. The system tracks the
sky by a linear actuator pushing on the telescope cradle, which is constrained to rotate around the polar axis formed by
the two system pivots. The upper pivot is freely rotating but ﬁxed in position, with the telescope-cradle center of mass
arranged directly beneath it. The lower pivot can be positioned in 3D space to change the polar axis direction and thus
allow high-precision polar alignment.

tracking and precision polar alignment methods (Section 2.2), optical considerations (Section 2.3), and the thermal
design (Section 2.4). We conclude with a discussion of the series of Argus Array prototypes designed to test the
pseudofocal design (Section 3).

2. PSEUDOFOCAL ARRAY DESIGN

There are four major considerations in a fully-developed pseudofocal array design: a) arranging the telescope array
geometry such that all telescopes can look though a single small window; b) arranging the telescope mount geometry
such that the window remains ﬁxed as the telescope tracks; c) designing the system optics to minimize ghosts and
optical aberrations; and d) designing the system enclosure to eliminate turbulence and air motion around the array.

2.1 Array geometry

Because the beams must all pass through the same point, the physical telescope array shape mirrors the shape of
the array’s ﬁeld of view (FoV) on the sky. Since the sky forms a sphere, the simplest array shape is thus a bowl.
If the array is designed to be gapless, the radius-of-curvature of that bowl (Rc) is set by the ﬁeld of view of the
telescopes (F ) and the telescope aperture size (dap). A practical array, however, will need small physical gaps (dap)
between telescopes, allowing for mounting and alignment systems. For a spherical telescope bowl, these quantities
are related in the following way:

2πRc

(cid:18) F

(cid:19)

360◦

= dap + dgap

(1)

For the Argus Array, this leads to a radius of curvature of ≈6m, and thus a telescope bowl diameter of ≈10m
(the bowl diameter is less than the base sphere’s diameter because the telescopes do not cover a full 180◦ FoV). This
simple relationship assumes one-dimensional linear packing; in a real design (Galliher et al. 2022, these proceedings)
more complex 2D packing arrangements allow somewhat more compact arrays.

2.2 Tracking system & ﬁxed window geometry

Precision sky tracking, without the image rotation inherent to an altitude/azimuth mount, requires the entire
telescope array to rotate around an axis aligned to the Earth’s rotation axis. The array’s polar axis is a line that
need only be deﬁned by two points. If we hang the array from those points, allowing free rotation around them,
the full array is thus constrained to rotate only around the axis deﬁned by those points. Polar alignment can then
be easily achieved by constructing a single, ﬁxed-in-place pivot from which the array hangs, and adding a second
pivot which can be precisely located in 3D space to ﬁx the direction of the polar axis.

We have elected to place the array center of mass directly below the ﬁxed pivot. With potentially tens of
thousands of pounds to support, this allows the load-bearing pivot to be a simple oﬀ-the-shelf industrial item
carrying the vast majority of the structural load. The precision-polar-alignment pivot, then, need only take on
lateral load as the system tracks, at most a few percent of the total weight. Both the pivots and the window must
be located along the polar axis, and symmetry requires that the array’s natural center of mass is close to its optical
convergence point. In practice, therefore, counterweights are required to move the center of mass away from the
window location.

To actually move the system, a linear actuator pushes the telescope bowl from the side. Because the linear
actuator is at a long lever arm compared to the pivot position, the eﬀects of motion imperfections are minimized, and
our current prototypes have shown that oﬀ-the-shelf components achieve the required tracking accuracy (Vasquez
Soto et al. 2022, these proceedings). We expect the array to track for 15 minutes (approximately one camera ﬁeld
of view in sky motion) at a time, and so the tracking motion is only several degrees.

Although the telescope array is on the scale of a large optical telescope, the Argus tracking system is designed for
only the low-amplitude swings the all-sky survey requires, and is built from almost entirely oﬀ-the-shelf industrial
components. The tracking drive can thus be constructed at, relatively, a very low cost.

2.3 Optical considerations

The pseudofocal array uncommonly requires all light to pass through an external glass window which appears
quite tilted for almost all telescopes in the array. Tilted optics are common in internal telescope instrumentation
(for example in dichroic beamsplitters), and do not introduce optical aberrations. In converging beams they can,
however, induce ghost images from double-reﬂections, beam displacement, and other undesirable eﬀects. In this
subsection we show that almost all of these negative eﬀects are not present in the pseudofocal design (because only
parallel beams pass through the window), and discuss mitigation strategies for the remaining eﬀects.

2.3.1 Enclosure window optics

Window shape and size: The dimensions of the ﬁxed window are deﬁned by the footprint of the convergence
point of all the telescope beams. A single telescope looking through the window with a beam direction normal to
the window has a beam size of the telescope aperture (Dap) plus the beam expansion angle corresponding to the
telescope’s ﬁeld of view (F ). Because the physical beam expansion increases with distance between the telescope
and window (RC), the footprint size also depends on the radius of curvature of the telescope bowl and thus on the
mechanical packing eﬃciency of the telescopes. Telescopes looking though the window at more oblique angles (θ)
also have an elongated beam footprint. For the full array, the window diameter DW is determined by the beam size
of a telescope at the edge of the array:

DW =

2RC tan(F/2) + Dap
cos(θ)

(2)

This relation shows that an increase in the number of telescopes, overlapping the telescope FoVs, increasing the
telescope aperture, etc., correspondingly requires an increase in window size. The Argus bowl design maximizes the
telescope-to-window ratio for a given full-array FoV, leading to a 36-inch window, ≈4× larger than the individual
telescope apertures, but < 1% of the surface area of the full telescope array.

Angle-of-incidence eﬀects: Commercially-available antireﬂection coatings have a restricted range of eﬀective
angles of incidence, and this places an eﬀective upper limit of 100◦–120◦ on the ﬁeld of view of an array looking
though a single window. The Argus Array’s Key Projects’ requirements15 easily conform to these limits, especially
with the acceptance of slightly increased light losses for telescopes at the edge of the array. Newly-developed
coatings16 could relax these limits in the future. We have also explored multiple-window designs, but found that
the increased mechanical complexity outweighed the optical performance gains.

Figure 3. Blocking double-reﬂected ghosts with a two-window split array. The entire array is still mounted on a single
tracking mount, but a dividing wall prevents all two-bounce optical ghosting between telescopes.

Window optical quality: Parallelism of the window glass is critically important to avoid imparting a poor
wavefront onto the telescopes. However, a meniscus-lens-like bending of the window (the most common concern
for a necessarily-unsupported horizontal piece of glass) does not signiﬁcantly aﬀect the ﬁnal image quality. The
relatively small size of the window (<90cm even for the full 900-telescope Argus Array) thus makes parallelism at
the required level relatively simple to achieve. Our Zemax and on-sky experiments for the Argus prototypes have
conﬁrmed that even high-quality ﬂoat glass produces optical quality within the error budget for acceptable images
across the array.

2.3.2 Optical ghosts

Internal window ghosts: The telescope window passes only naturally collimated beams from the sky, and so
this tilt cannot induce aberrations (for well-ﬁgured and parallel glass surfaces). Beam displacement is induced, but
this has no eﬀect on the telescope images. Similarly, multiple reﬂections within the window cannot produce ghosts
because multiple-bounce reﬂections of parallel beams only displace the beam positions.

Inter-telescope ghosts: The pseudofocal design introduces one extra, and complex, source of ghosts in the array
images: light reﬂected back from the telescopes, oﬀ the ﬁxed dome window, and into another telescope in the array.
Because they involve a bounce out though the entire telescope optical train, these reﬂections can produce focused
stellar images on other telescopes in the array; furthermore, the beams are reﬂected around the normal axis of
the window and so ghosts can be induced between widely-separated telescopes. Because the window is ﬁxed while
the telescope tracks, the ghosts would move rapidly through the ﬁeld, potentially producing confusing sources for
transient detection.

This issue can be mitigated by high-quality antireﬂection coatings, and that is likely to be suﬃcient for most
applications. Furthermore, there is a simple mechanical solution that completely interrupts all inter-telescope beam
paths. The system geometry requires that all reﬂected ghost beams cross the polar axis, producing optical ghost
images on the other side of the array. A simple screen between the east and west sides of the array thus blocks all
possible inter-telescope ghosts produced by the pseudofocal design. A small split between the east and west halves
of the array, with each looking though their own window, enables this ghost screen to avoid all science photons
(Figure 3). The entire array is still mounted on a single (slightly larger) mount, and thus this solution thus does
not add signiﬁcant cost.

2.3.3 Scattered light

With a tiny window opening making up only ≈ 0.2% of the dome surface area, the pseudofocal array is less
susceptible to scattered light than a conventional dome design. Each telescope is eﬀectively looking through a distant

Figure 4. The Argus Array within its enclosure. The ﬁxed enclosure is constructed from a low-cost, heavily-insulated geodesic
dome with an extension housing the computing an HVAC systems. Heat generation within the enclosure is minimized by
water cooling all electronic components, and fans are used between exposure runs to maintain an isothermal environment.

stop, and moonlight (for example) can thus only enter the dome as a narrowly-constrained beam. Scattered-light
control is thus reduced to two areas:

Window dust accumulation: As the only optical surface exposed to unﬁltered air, the ﬁxed window is susceptible
to collecting dust, pollen and other contaminants. We have designed the window as a weather-sealed unit (although
the sunshield gives further protection during the day), and its antireﬂection coatings are designed for architectural
glass. The window can thus be regularly cleaned in the same manner as a building window, with a pressure washer
or squeegee. A baﬄe around the window restricts light entry to the array’s ﬁeld of view.

Internal scattered light: Moonlight and starlight which makes it into the dome will have an approximately 50%
chance of hitting a telescope and sensor as science-photons. The remainder, falling into mechanically-required gaps
in the array, can be controlled by optically-absorbing surfaces, black-painted or black-anodized components, and
light shrouds around the sensors themselves.

2.4 Thermal control and enclosure

With a single ﬁxed window at the top of the dome, careful thermal control is essential to avoid dome seeing being
generated. Without any openings, traditional dome seeing reduction is not possible. Instead, the array enclosure
(Figure 4) will be designed to maintain isothermality as far as possible, preventing the generation of convective
cells. This protection will be maintained by a series of passive and active measures.

2.4.1 Decoupling the array from the external thermal environment

The Argus dome will be heavily insulated, with an internal temperature maintained over long (seasonal) periods,
and an external temperature close to that of the surrounding environment (to avoid telescope-induced ground
seeing). The Argus Pathﬁnder prototype will thoroughly test the ability of passive insulation to maintain the
enclosure external at a temperature suﬃciently close to that of the surrounding air. If necessary, an active system
in a double-shelled design would enable the interior and exterior surfaces to be essentially decoupled, eliminating the
risk of dome seeing or warm-dome-induced external seeing. A sunshield over the window will protect the telescopes
during the daytime, as well as provide a ﬂat-ﬁeld calibration system.

The window is the only surface for which temperature maintenance could be a challenge. For Argus, the
window only makes up ∼ 0.1% of the surface area of the enclosure. The telescopes, however, are imaging through
the window, and so we must avoid strong turbulence being generated at the window/air interface. The window
will be thick (1/4 inch or more) to maintain appropriate ﬂatness and weather resistance, and the internal enclosure

temperature will be changed seasonally to avoid large temperature gradients. The Argus Pathﬁnder will verify
this approach in realistic mountaintop conditions and at almost full scale (because beam elongation dominates
the window size, the Pathﬁnder window is ≈75% of the full Argus Array’s window size). If further insulation is
necessary, a double-glazing window scheme could be built, with resulting ghosts controlled by the design explored
in Section 2.3.2.

2.4.2 Eliminating inside-enclosure heat sources & ensuring an isothermal environment

All heat-producing equipment inside the dome (most notably, the science cameras) will be cooled by an insulated
watercooling system which removes generated heat from the enclosure without causing signiﬁcant temperature
gradients. Other electrical components such as network switches are located within cabinets watercooled by the
same system. This, along with the dome insulation, greatly limits hot-spots and gradients that could lead to
convective turnover.

Even a very heavily insulated dome will, however, still transport heat through its surface and may eventually
cause thermal gradients to form between the array and the enclosure walls. Airﬂow for internal heat conduction
could prevent these issues, but at the potential cost of introducing turbulence. The system tracking design, however,
requires a ≈1 minute downtime to reset the tracking drive every 15 minutes. No observations take place during this
return-to-start motion, and this period can thus be used for aggressive thermal control measures. Fans fed with
ﬁltered air at the required enclosure temperature will ensure the internal air is well-mixed, and give the opportunity
for rapid thermal transfer with any array components that need to be returned to the correct temperature. With the
fans turned oﬀ just before the start of exposures, and heat sources within the dome carefully controlled, we expect
the settling time to be seconds, leaving an isothermal environment with little opportunity for dome seeing to arise.
The Pathﬁnder telescope is designed with a 1/2.5-scale version of this system and will validate its performance.

3. THE ARGUS PROTOTYPE SERIES & SUMMARY

We are testing the Argus Array design in a series of prototypes (Table 1). The Argus Technology Demonstrator
went on-sky in 2021 and is used for the development of the telescopes, cameras and tracking drive systems. The
38-telescope Argus Pathﬁnder is currently under construction and is a 1/2.5 scaling in linear dimension of cradle
compared to the full array. Pathﬁnder will validate the pseudofocal design’s optical, mechanical and thermal
performance with a telescope “cradle” that forms a segment of the full Argus Array’s bowl. Pathﬁnder will also
demonstrate the operation of the full Argus pipeline, including rapid image astrometry, de-warping, segmentation,
and image subtraction. Starting in 2022, Pathﬁnder will perform a sweep through the sky each night, with 15
minutes of high-cadence observations on each part of the sky over a 92◦ declination range. This dataset, which will

Table 1. The speciﬁcations of the Argus Array prototypes compared to the full array baseline design.

Argus Array  Technology Demonstrator (2021)Argus Array Pathﬁnder (2022)Argus Optical ArrayTelescopes9x 203 mm Celestron Rowe-Ackermann Schmidt Astrograph or Planewave Argus-838x 203 mm aperture, F/2.8 Planewave Instruments Argus-8900x 203 mm aperture, F/2.8 Planewave Instruments Argus-8Detectors61 MPix Sony IMX455 sCMOS 1.7e- noise at 80 μs readout >90% QE at 540 nm61 MPix Sony IMX455 sCMOS 1.7e- noise at 80 μs readout >90% QE at 540 nm61 MPix Sony IMX455 sCMOS 1.7e- noise at 80 μs readout >90% QE at 540 nmField of View17.7 sq. deg. per telescope 155 sq. deg. instantaneous total  9 sq. deg. per telescope 344 sq. deg. instantaneous total (right ascension stripe for -20° < decl. < 72°) 9 sq. deg. per telescope 7,916 sq. deg. instantaneous totalNightly Field of View5000 sq. deg (15+ minutes per night depending on decl.)19,000 sq. deg (15+ minutes per night depending on decl.)19,000 sq. deg (2-10 hours per night depending on decl.)Sampling1.93” per pixel1.38” per pixel1.38” per pixelSiteLab resource, deployed on-site in  Chapel Hill, NCPisgah Astronomical  Research Institute (Rosman, NC, USA)North AmericaExposure Time1-second high-speed mode 30-second standard cadence1-second high-speed mode 30-second standard cadence1-second high-speed mode 30-second standard cadenceWavelengthsg-band or r-bandg-band or wideband g+rAlternating 9-minute ratchets  of g-band & wideband g+rTotal Detector Size550 MPix2.3 GPix54.9 GPixNightly Raw Data43 TB (1-second cadence) 710 GB (30-second cadence)180 TB (1-second cadence) 6 TB (30-second cadence)4.3 PB (1-second cadence) 145 TB (30-second cadence)Peak Throughput (95% duty cycle)110 Gbps (1-second cadence) 3.7 Gbps (30-second cadence)464 Gbps (1-second cadence) 15.5 Gbps (30-second cadence)11 Tbps (1-second cadence) 367 Gbps (30-second cadence) be publicly released, will enable a range of initial Argus key projects15 including fast-radio-burst optical counterparts,
fast nearby-star ﬂare followup, and solar-system occultations.

This paper was supported by NSF MSIP (AST-2034381) and a grant from Schmidt Futures. This research, and the
construction of the Argus prototypes, is undertaken with the collaboration of the Be A Maker (BeAM) network of
makerspaces at UNC Chapel Hill and the UNC BeAM Design Center.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

REFERENCES

[1] Rau, A., Kulkarni, S. R., Law, N. M., Bloom, J. S., Ciardi, D., Djorgovski, G. S., Fox, D. B., Gal-Yam, A.,
Grillmair, C. C., Kasliwal, M. M., Nugent, P. E., Ofek, E. O., Quimby, R. M., Reach, W. T., Shara, M.,
Bildsten, L., Cenko, S. B., Drake, A. J., Filippenko, A. V., Helfand, D. J., Helou, G., Howell, D. A., Poznanski,
D., and Sullivan, M., “Exploring the Optical Transient Sky with the Palomar Transient Factory,” PASP 121,
1334 (Dec. 2009).

[2] Law, N. M., Kulkarni, S. R., Dekany, R. G., Ofek, E. O., Quimby, R. M., Nugent, P. E., Surace, J., Grillmair,
C. C., Bloom, J. S., Kasliwal, M. M., Bildsten, L., Brown, T., Cenko, S. B., Ciardi, D., Croner, E., Djorgovski,
S. G., van Eyken, J., Filippenko, A. V., Fox, D. B., Gal-Yam, A., Hale, D., Hamam, N., Helou, G., Henning, J.,
Howell, D. A., Jacobsen, J., Laher, R., Mattingly, S., McKenna, D., Pickles, A., Poznanski, D., Rahmer, G.,
Rau, A., Rosing, W., Shara, M., Smith, R., Starr, D., Sullivan, M., Velur, V., Walters, R., and Zolkower, J.,
“The Palomar Transient Factory: System Overview, Performance, and First Results,” PASP 121, 1395 (Dec.
2009).

[3] Lipunov, V. M., Krylov, A. V., Kornilov, V. G., Borisov, G. V., Kuvshinov, D. A., Belinsky, A. A., Kuznetsov,
M. V., Potanin, S. A., Antipov, G. A., Tyurina, N. V., Gorbovskoy, E. S., and Chilingaryan, I., “MASTER:
The Mobile Astronomical System of Telescope-Robots,” Astronomische Nachrichten 325, 580–582 (Oct 2004).
[4] Tonry, J. L., Denneau, L., Heinze, A. N., Stalder, B., Smith, K. W., Smartt, S. J., Stubbs, C. W., Weiland,
H. J., and Rest, A., “ATLAS: A high-cadence all-sky survey system,” Publications of the Astronomical Society
of the Paciﬁc 130, 064505 (may 2018).

[5] Shappee, B. J., Prieto, J. L., Grupe, D., Kochanek, C. S., Stanek, K. Z., De Rosa, G., Mathur, S., Zu, Y.,
Peterson, B. M., Pogge, R. W., Komossa, S., Im, M., Jencson, J., Holoien, T. W. S., Basu, U., Beacom, J. F.,
Szczygie(cid:32)l, D. M., Brimacombe, J., Adams, S., Campillay, A., Choi, C., Contreras, C., Dietrich, M., Dubberley,
M., Elphick, M., Foale, S., Giustini, M., Gonzalez, C., Hawkins, E., Howell, D. A., Hsiao, E. Y., Koss, M.,
Leighly, K. M., Morrell, N., Mudd, D., Mullins, D., Nugent, J. M., Parrent, J., Phillips, M. M., Pojmanski,
G., Rosing, W., Ross, R., Sand, D., Terndrup, D. M., Valenti, S., Walker, Z., and Yoon, Y., “The Man behind
the Curtain: X-Rays Drive the UV through NIR Variability in the 2013 Active Galactic Nucleus Outburst in
NGC 2617,” ApJ 788, 48 (Jun 2014).

[6] Bellm, E. C., Kulkarni, S. R., Graham, M. J., Dekany, R., Smith, R. M., Riddle, R., Masci, F. J., Helou,
G., Prince, T. A., Adams, S. M., Barbarino, C., Barlow, T., Bauer, J., Beck, R., Belicki, J., Biswas, R.,
Blagorodnova, N., Bodewits, D., Bolin, B., Brinnel, V., Brooke, T., Bue, B., Bulla, M., Burruss, R., Cenko,
S. B., Chang, C.-K., Connolly, A., Coughlin, M., Cromer, J., Cunningham, V., De, K., Delacroix, A., Desai,
V., Duev, D. A., Eadie, G., Farnham, T. L., Feeney, M., Feindt, U., Flynn, D., Franckowiak, A., Frederick,
S., Fremling, C., Gal-Yam, A., Gezari, S., Giomi, M., Goldstein, D. A., Golkhou, V. Z., Goobar, A., Groom,
S., Hacopians, E., Hale, D., Henning, J., Ho, A. Y. Q., Hover, D., Howell, J., Hung, T., Huppenkothen, D.,
Imel, D., Ip, W.-H., Ivezi´c, ˇZ., Jackson, E., Jones, L., Juric, M., Kasliwal, M. M., Kaspi, S., Kaye, S., Kelley,
M. S. P., Kowalski, M., Kramer, E., Kupfer, T., Landry, W., Laher, R. R., Lee, C.-D., Lin, H. W., Lin, Z.-Y.,
Lunnan, R., Giomi, M., Mahabal, A., Mao, P., Miller, A. A., Monkewitz, S., Murphy, P., Ngeow, C.-C., Nordin,
J., Nugent, P., Ofek, E., Patterson, M. T., Penprase, B., Porter, M., Rauch, L., Rebbapragada, U., Reiley, D.,
Rigault, M., Rodriguez, H., van Roestel, J., Rusholme, B., van Santen, J., Schulze, S., Shupe, D. L., Singer,
L. P., Soumagnac, M. T., Stein, R., Surace, J., Sollerman, J., Szkody, P., Taddia, F., Terek, S., Van Sistine,
A., van Velzen, S., Vestrand, W. T., Walters, R., Ward, C., Ye, Q.-Z., Yu, P.-C., Yan, L., and Zolkower, J.,
“The Zwicky Transient Facility: System Overview, Performance, and First Results,” PASP 131, 018002 (Jan
2019).

[7] Kaiser, N., Burgett, W., Chambers, K., Denneau, L., Heasley, J., Jedicke, R., Magnier, E., Morgan, J.,
Onaka, P., and Tonry, J., [The Pan-STARRS wide-ﬁeld optical/NIR imaging survey], vol. 7733 of Society of
Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, 77330E (2010).

[8] Larson, S., Beshore, E., Hill, R., Christensen, E., McLean, D., Kolar, S., McNaught, R., and Garradd, G., “The
CSS and SSS NEO surveys,” in [AAS/Division for Planetary Sciences Meeting Abstracts #35], AAS/Division
for Planetary Sciences Meeting Abstracts, 36.04 (May 2003).

[9] Drake, A. J., Djorgovski, S. G., Mahabal, A., Beshore, E., Larson, S., Graham, M. J., Williams, R., Christensen,
E., Catelan, M., Boattini, A., Gibbs, A., Hill, R., and Kowalski, R., “First Results from the Catalina Real-Time
Transient Survey,” ApJ 696, 870–884 (May 2009).

[10] Dark Energy Survey Collaboration, Abbott, T., Abdalla, F. B., Aleksi´c, J., Allam, S., Amara, A., Bacon, D.,
Balbinot, E., Banerji, M., Bechtol, K., Benoit-L´evy, A., Bernstein, G. M., Bertin, E., Blazek, J., Bonnett, C.,
Bridle, S., Brooks, D., Brunner, R. J., Buckley-Geer, E., Burke, D. L., Caminha, G. B., Capozzi, D., Carlsen,
J., Carnero-Rosell, A., Carollo, M., Carrasco-Kind, M., Carretero, J., Castander, F. J., Clerkin, L., Collett,
T., Conselice, C., Crocce, M., Cunha, C. E., D’Andrea, C. B., da Costa, L. N., Davis, T. M., Desai, S., Diehl,
H. T., Dietrich, J. P., Dodelson, S., Doel, P., Drlica-Wagner, A., Estrada, J., Etherington, J., Evrard, A. E.,
Fabbri, J., Finley, D. A., Flaugher, B., Foley, R. J., Fosalba, P., Frieman, J., Garc´ıa-Bellido, J., Gaztanaga,
E., Gerdes, D. W., Giannantonio, T., Goldstein, D. A., Gruen, D., Gruendl, R. A., Guarnieri, P., Gutierrez,
G., Hartley, W., Honscheid, K., Jain, B., James, D. J., Jeltema, T., Jouvel, S., Kessler, R., King, A., Kirk, D.,
Kron, R., Kuehn, K., Kuropatkin, N., Lahav, O., Li, T. S., Lima, M., Lin, H., Maia, M. A. G., Makler, M.,
Manera, M., Maraston, C., Marshall, J. L., Martini, P., McMahon, R. G., Melchior, P., Merson, A., Miller,
C. J., Miquel, R., Mohr, J. J., Morice-Atkinson, X., Naidoo, K., Neilsen, E., Nichol, R. C., Nord, B., Ogando,
R., Ostrovski, F., Palmese, A., Papadopoulos, A., Peiris, H. V., Peoples, J., Percival, W. J., Plazas, A. A.,
Reed, S. L., Refregier, A., Romer, A. K., Roodman, A., Ross, A., Rozo, E., Rykoﬀ, E. S., Sadeh, I., Sako,
M., S´anchez, C., Sanchez, E., Santiago, B., Scarpine, V., Schubnell, M., Sevilla-Noarbe, I., Sheldon, E., Smith,
M., Smith, R. C., Soares-Santos, M., Sobreira, F., Soumagnac, M., Suchyta, E., Sullivan, M., Swanson, M.,
Tarle, G., Thaler, J., Thomas, D., Thomas, R. C., Tucker, D., Vieira, J. D., Vikram, V., Walker, A. R.,
Wechsler, R. H., Weller, J., Wester, W., Whiteway, L., Wilcox, H., Yanny, B., Zhang, Y., and Zuntz, J.,
“The Dark Energy Survey: more than dark energy – an overview,” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society 460, 1270–1299 (03 2016).

[11] Dyer, M. J., Dhillon, V. S., Littlefair, S., Steeghs, D., Ulaczyk, K., Chote, P., Galloway, D., and Rol, E., “A
telescope control and scheduling system for the Gravitational-wave Optical Transient Observer (GOTO),” in
[Observatory Operations: Strategies, Processes, and Systems VII], Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation
Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series 10704, 107040C (July 2018).

[12] Ricker, G. R., Winn, J. N., Vanderspek, R., Latham, D. W., Bakos, G. ´A., Bean, J. L., Berta-Thompson,
Z. K., Brown, T. M., Buchhave, L., Butler, N. R., Butler, R. P., Chaplin, W. J., Charbonneau, D., Christensen-
Dalsgaard, J., Clampin, M., Deming, D., Doty, J., De Lee, N., Dressing, C., Dunham, E. W., Endl, M., Fressin,
F., Ge, J., Henning, T., Holman, M. J., Howard, A. W., Ida, S., Jenkins, J. M., Jernigan, G., Johnson, J. A.,
Kaltenegger, L., Kawai, N., Kjeldsen, H., Laughlin, G., Levine, A. M., Lin, D., Lissauer, J. J., MacQueen,
P., Marcy, G., McCullough, P. R., Morton, T. D., Narita, N., Paegert, M., Palle, E., Pepe, F., Pepper, J.,
Quirrenbach, A., Rinehart, S. A., Sasselov, D., Sato, B., Seager, S., Sozzetti, A., Stassun, K. G., Sullivan, P.,
Szentgyorgyi, A., Torres, G., Udry, S., and Villasenor, J., “Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite (TESS),”
Journal of Astronomical Telescopes, Instruments, and Systems 1, 014003 (Jan. 2015).

[13] Law, N. M., Fors, O., Ratzloﬀ, J., Wulfken, P., Kavanaugh, D., Sitar, D. J., Pruett, Z., Birchard, M. N.,
Barlow, B. N., Cannon, K., Cenko, S. B., Dunlap, B., Kraus, A., and Maccarone, T. J., “Evryscope Science:
Exploring the Potential of All-Sky Gigapixel-Scale Telescopes,” PASP 127, 234 (Mar. 2015).

[14] Ratzloﬀ, J. K., Law, N. M., Fors, O., Corbett, H. T., Howard, W. S., del Ser, D., and Haislip, J., “Building

the Evryscope: Hardware Design and Performance,” PASP 131, 075001 (July 2019).

[15] Law, N. M., Corbett, H., Galliher, N. W., Gonzalez, R., Vasquez, A., Walters, G., Machia, L., Ratzloﬀ, J.,
Ackley, K., Bizon, C., Clemens, C., Cox, S., Eikenberry, S., Howard, W. S., Glazier, A., Mann, A. W., Quimby,
R., Reichart, D., and Trilling, D., “Low-cost Access to the Deep, High-cadence Sky: the Argus Optical Array,”
PASP 134, 035003 (Mar. 2022).

[16] Pfeiﬀer, K., Ghazaryan, L., Schulz, U., and Szeghalmi, A., “Wide-angle broadband antireﬂection coatings
prepared by atomic layer deposition,” ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 11(24), 21887–21894 (2019).

