Proceedings of International Conference on Smart Structures and Systems IC

7 

DESIGN OF CONFORMAL ANTENNA FOR 
AIRCRAFT  APPLICATIONS 

N.V.Laxminarayen1*  , G.Lokeshwaran1*, K.S.Murugan1*  and Dr.P.Jothilakshmi1# 
1*Final Year UG Students, 1#Professor 
Sri Venkateswara College of Engineering, Pennalur, Sriperumbudur 
mail id:  nvlnarayen96@gmail.com,   jothi@svce.ac.in 

Abstract
 The most challenging thing in real world is 
communicating   with   aircraft,   even   though   several 
communication    technologies   has  been    adopted    for 
tracking    and  monitoring    the  aircraft    there    is  no 
cent  percent  efficiency  , for that  an  implementation  
of  conformal  antenna  for  transmission and reception 
of  the  signal  is  preferred  .  In  radio  communication 
and   avionics    a  conformal    antenna    or  conformal  
array    is  a  flat  radio  antenna  which  is  designed  to 
conform or follow some prescribed shape, for example a 
curved conformal antenna is designed  and  is mounted  
on  or  embedded    in  a  curved    surface.  The  conformal 
antenna  is  a  collection  of  large  number  of  smaller 
antennas  (PAA)  each  one  is  connected  to  a  phase  
shifter.    The  phased  array  antenna  will  have  high 
directivity in desired application. Conformal arrays are 
typically limited to high frequencies    in   the   UHF   or   
microwave        range,      where      the  wavelength    of  the 
waves is small enough that small antennas can be  used.  
The  main  objective  of  this  project  is  to  embed  this 
conformal  antenna  on the surface  of the aircraft  with 
increased  gain.  To  implement    the  above    mentioned  
problem    we  are  using  CST  microwave  software. 
Conventional  methods  now  used  in  aircrafts  are  done 
by  using  conformal   antenna  to  save  space  and  even  
military    applications    to  be  anonymous.    Antenna  
stands    to  be    an    interface    between    the    transmitter  
and    the    receiver.    By  working    on  the  software    and 
hardware    features    of  antennas    we  can    develop    an  
antenna  with  better  gain.  By  the  adoption  of better   
gain   the   antenna   will   be   more   efficient.   Thus   
by  implementing    this  conformal  antenna  on  the 
aircraft  surface  with  increased  gain  high  degree  of 
accuracy, clarity and effective communication  link can 
be achieved. 

Index 
Conformal  array,  PAA, UHF, CST microwave studio. 

Conformal 

 Terms

 antenna,  

I.  INTRODUCTION 

HIS  Antennas  are  key  components    of   any   wireless 
communication 
the  devices  
that  allow 

 system. 

  They 

  are 

the 

signal 

 of  a 

transfer 

to  waves 

for 
that 
propagates   through  space  and  can  be  received  by 
another  antenna.  The  receiving  antennas    responsible   
for    the    reciprocal      process      which      is  turning  an 
electromagnetic   wave  into  a  signal  or  voltage  at  its 
terminals  that  can  subsequently    be  processed  by  the 
receiver. The receiving  and transmitting  functionalities  
of the antenna structure itself are fully characterized by 

An  antenna  system  is  defined  as  the  combinationof  
the  antenna  and  its  feed  line.  As  an  antenna  is  usually 
connected to a transmission  line, how to best make this 
connection  is a subject of interest, since the signal from 
the feedline should be radiated  into space in an efficient  
and desired  way. In some applications   where    space   
is      very      limited      such      as      hand  portables   and 
aircraft,  it is desirable  to integrate  the antenna and its 
feedline.  In  other  applications  such  as  the  reception  of 
TV    broadcasting,   the  antenna    is  far  away    from    the 
receiver and a long transmission line has to be used. 

The  dipole  antenna,  a  straight  wire,  fed  auto  the  center 
by  a  two-wire  transmission  line  was  the  first  antenna 
ever  used  and  is  also  one  of  the  best  understood.  For 
effective  reception  and  transmission    it    must    be  
approximately      l/2    long    auto    the  frequency    of 
operation.  It must  be fairly  long  when  used  at low   
frequencies,       and     even     auto      higher      frequencies   
its  protruding    nature   makes    it  quite    understandable.  
Further,  its low   gain,   lack   of   directionality    and   
extremely      narrow  bandwidth  make  it  even  less 
attractive. 

Requirements   for  conformal  antennas  for  airborne 
systems,  increased    bandwidth      requirements,      and  
multi    functionality  have  led  to  heavy  exploitation  of 
printed  (patch)  or other slot-  type  antennas  and  the  use 
of  powerful  computational  tools  for  designing    such  
antenna.    Needless    to    say,    the    commercial  mobile 
communications    industry  has  been  the  catalyst  for  the 
recent    explosive    growth    in  antenna    design    needs.  
Certainly, the  past  decade  has  seen  an  extensive  use  
of    antennas    by  public  for  cellular,  GPS,  satellite, 
for  computers  Wi-Fi,  Bluetooth 
wireless  LAN 

Department of ECE, Saveetha Engineering College, Chennai.  

Page 29 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Proceedings of International Conference on Smart Structures and Systems IC

7 

technology,  radio  frequency  ID  devices,  WiMAX    and  
so  on.  However,  future   needs  will  be  even greater 
when  a  multitude  of  antennas  are  integrated  into 
automobiles for all sorts of communication needs. 

Microstrip antennas (often called patch antennas) are 
widely used in the microwave frequency region because 
of their simplicity and compatibility with printed-circuit 
technology,  making    them      easy      to      manufacture   
either   as   stand-alone elements   or  as  elements   of  
arrays.    A    microstrip      antenna  consists    of  a  planar  
radiating  structure  over  a ground  plane separated by 
an  electrically   thin  layer  of  dielectric  substrate  .  The 
patch  conductors  can  assume  virtually  any  shape  but 
conventional  shapes  are  generally  used  to  simplify  
analysis  and 
  The  
rectangular   and  circular patches are the basic and most 
commonly used microstrip antennas. These patches can 
be  used  for  the  simplest  and  the  most   demanding   
applications.      For    example,    characteristics  such      as   
dual      and      circular      polarizations,        dual-frequency 
operation,  frequency  agility,  broad  bandwidth,  feedline 
flexibility,  beam  scanning,  omnidirectional  patterning 
and soon  are  easily  obtained  in  these  patch  shapes.  
Because  these  geometries  are  separable  in  nature,  their 
analysis is also relatively simple. 

  performance 

  prediction. 

Fig 1.1 Microstrip Patch Antenna 

DESIGN OF CONFORMAL ANTENNA 

II. 
A.Overview 

to 

certain 

accomplish 

aerodynamic 

Conformal antennas usually form a determined shape in 
order 
or 
electromagnetic  considerations,  such  as  special  angular 
coverage.  Either  omnidirectional  or  directional  patterns 
with  an  arbitrary  direction  can  be  obtained  using 
cylindrical,  conical,  or  spherical  radiating  structures. 
Typically,  the  omnidirectional  pattern  can  also  be 
conventional 
means 
accomplished 
of 
by 
wire  antennas 
such  as  monopoles  or  dipoles. 
Nevertheless, a strict tolerance manufacturing process is 
required for these wire antennas in very high frequency 
In 
applications 
addition,  the  possibility  to  generate  beam  forming  in 
conformal array antennas can provide more flexibility to 
the communication system. On the other hand, the micro 

. 

strip  conformal  antennas  are  widely  used  in  satellite, 
aerospace,  or  point-to-point  communications  due  to 
many advantages such as low profile, low cost, or easy 
fabrication. 
the 
power  handling  capacity  of  these  kinds  of  antennas  is 
limited,  and  the  dielectric  substrate  losses  as  much  as 
the  bending  of  the  structure  can  produce  a  significant 
efficiency  reduction,  especially  for  a  large  antenna 
array. 

Nevertheless, 

In  this  way,  the  conventional  waveguide  technology  is 
suitable to resolve these issues due to its advantages of 
low losses, high power capacity, and high efficiency. In 
addition,  a  complex  conformal  structure  can  be 
approximated  by  using  another  shape  with  planar  faces 
like  a  regular  polyhedron,  reducing  the  costs  derived 
from 
the  conformal  structure  manufactured  using 
conventional waveguide technology. 

The  moving  missile  is  required  to  realize  the  data 
transmission  between  the  missile  and  the  launcher  for 
high  precision  attack.  It  leads  to  how  to  effectively 
design  the  missile antennas  when considering the least 
disturbance  to  the  flight  dynamics  and  to  the  air  frame 
structure.  It  should  be  with  a  low  profile  and  can  be 
mounted 
a 
missile.  Obviously, the cylindrically conformal antenna 
is a preferred choice. Such kind of antennas has always 
been  the  focus  of  the  research  and  several  forms  of 
practical antennas were reported, such as printed dipole , 
the  substrate 
microstrip  patch,  printed  slot,  and 
integrated waveguide (SIW) antennas. 

surface 

the 

on 

of 

g 1.2 Conformal structure with single 
Microstrip             Patch 

      Fi

Design 

B. 
Equations 
First,  the  length  of  the  patch  L  controls  the  resonant 
frequency as seen here. This is true in general, even for 
that  weave 
more  complicated  microstrip  antennas 
around  the  length  of  the  longest  path  on  the  microstrip 
controls  the  lowest  frequency  of  operation.  Equation 
(5.1) below gives the relationship between the resonant 
patch 
frequency 
length: 

and 

the 

Department of ECE, Saveetha Engineering College, Chennai.  

Page 30 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
     
 
Proceedings of International Conference on Smart Structures and Systems IC

7 

The  feeding  technique  used  here  is  corporate  feeding. 
Corporate  Feed  In  the  corporate  feed  configuration,  
the  antenna  elements  are  fed  by  1:n  power  divider 
network  with identical path lengths from the feed point 
each 
to 

element.  The  advantages   of  this  topology    include 
design  simplicity,  flexible  choice  of  element  spacing, 
and  broader  bandwidth,  and   they    are    amenable    to  
integration  with  other  devices such as amplifiers  and 
phase shifters. The disadvantage  of this type of array is 
that  it  requires  more  space  for  feed  network.  For  large 
arrays, the length of feed lines running to all elements is 
prohibitively  long,  which  results  in  high  insertion  loss. 
is  even  more  pronounced  at 
The 
insertion 
milimetre-wave 
adversely 
thereby 
degrading gain of the array. At higher frequencies,  the 
feed lines laid on  the  same  plane  as  the  patches  will  
also  radiate  and interfere  with  the  radiation  from  the  
patches.  Figure  5.1 shows   the   scheme   of   corporate   
feed.   It   consists   of transmission lines, bends, power 
splitters  or  T  junctions  and  quarter  wave  transformers.

 frequencies, 

loss 

The  width  W  controls  the  input  impedance  and  the 
radiation pattern (see the radiation equations here). The 
wider the patch becomes the lower the input impedance 
is. The permittivity  of the substrate controls the fringing 
fields  -  lower  permittivities  have  wider  fringes  and 
therefore   better  radiation.    Decreasing  the  permittivity 
also  increases  the  antenna's  bandwidth.  The  efficiency   
is  also    increased     with   a   lower      value    for    the 
permittivity.    The    impedance    of    the    antenna  
increases  with higher permittivity. 

Higher  values  of  permittivity  allow  a  "shrinking"  of  
the  patch    antenna.   Particularly    in  cell    phones,   the  
designers    are  given  very  little  space  and  want  the 
antenna  to  be  a  half-  wavelength   long.  One  technique  
is  to  use  a  substrate    with  a  very  high  permittivity. 
Equation  (5.2)  above  can  be  solved  for  L  to  illustrate 
this: 

Hence,  if the  permittivity  is  increased  by  a  factor  of  4, 
the  length  required  decreases  by  a  factor  of  2.  Using 
higher  values  for  permittivity  is  frequently exploited  in 
antenna miniaturization. 

The height of the substrate h also controls the bandwidth 
increasing  the height  increases  the bandwidth.  The  fact  
that  increasing      the    height      of      a      patch      antenna   
increases     its  bandwidth  can  be  understood by  recalling 
the general rule that "an antenna occupying more space in 
a spherical volume will have  a  wider  bandwidth".  This  
is    the    same    principle    that  applies  when  noting  that 
increasing  the thickness  of a dipole antenna increases its 
bandwidth.  Increasing  the  height  also  increases   the 
efficiency    of  the  antenna.    Increasing    the  height  does  
induce  surface  waves  that  travel  within  the  substrate 
(which  is  undesired  radiation  and  may  couple  to  other 
components). 

The     following     equation        roughly     describes    

how    the bandwidth scales with these parameters: 

C. Steps involved in designing the patch 
Following steps are taken to design a rectangular micro 
strip patch antenna. 
Step1: Calculation of width (W): 
The width of the micro strip patch antenna is given by 
the equation as 

W -Width of the patch. 
C -Free space velocity of light, 3 x 10! m/s. 
Step 2: Calculation of the Effective Dielectric Constant. 
This is based on the height, dielectric constant of the 
dielectric and the calculated width of the patch antenna. 
D.   Feeding technique 

Department of ECE, Saveetha Engineering College, Chennai.  

Page 31 

 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
Proceedings of International Conference on Smart Structures and Systems IC

7 

Fig 2.1 corporate feed model 

Fig 2.2.a conformal with straight surface 

Fig 2.2.b conformal with bend surface. 

The above figures shown  is the designed  model of 1x4 
conformal  antenna  with  corporate  feed  the  Layer 
below
antenna 
diagram 

shown 

the 

of 

is 

 Fig 2.3 layers of microstrip patch antenna. 

It  consists  of  three  layers  namely  patch,  substrate  and 
ground. The first layer  would a super conducting  metal 
like  copper  with  a  thickness  of  about  0.0345mm.we 
have  used  an  tetrahedral  patch  for  optimization.  The 
second  layer  will  be  dielectric  material  we  have  used 
rogers RT6002(lossy) material with permittivity 

                    III. ANALYSIS 

A. S parameter of the designed antenna 

Fig 3.1 S parameter of the radiating antenna. 
The   above   figure    shows   the    s-    Parameter   of    the  
designed antenna  it  indicates  that  it  can  be  operated  
at  frequency  of 9GHz  with  a  return  loss  of  about  -
35.5  db.  .  Generally bandwidth of the antenna is found 
from  the  return  loss  graph.  Bandwidth   is    obtained  
from    the    intersection    of    return    loss  graph    with    -
10dB  of the graph.  The  difference  between  the upper 
cut  off  frequency  and  lower  cutoff  frequency  gives  the 
bandwidth of the antenna. 

Department of ECE, Saveetha Engineering College, Chennai.  

Page 32 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Proceedings of International Conference on Smart Structures and Systems IC

7 

B.   Gain of the designed antenna 

 Fig 3.2  Farfield Gain radiation antenna of the antenna. 

Gain is a measure of the ability of the antenna to direct 
the input power into radiation in a particular direction 
and is measured at the peak radiation intensity. An 
isotropic antenna radiates equally in all directions. The 
simulated gain of gain of 11dB is obtained for frequency 
9.25GHz. 
The  Fig  3.3  represents  the 2D-directivity  of the 
antenna. Generally 2-D graph represents the polar plot. 
From the polar plot  the  magnitude  of  main  lobe  and  
side  lobe  is obtained. Here the main lobe of 
magnitude  2.14dB is obtained and the side   lobe   
magnitude   of   11.4   dB.   Since   the   main   lobe 
magnitude greater than side lobe level, the antenna has 
better efficiency. 

Fig 3.3 2D polar plot of the gain 
C.   directivity of the designed antenna 

Directivity  measures  the  power  density  the  antenna 
radiates  in  the  direction  of  the  strongest  emission 
versus the power density radiated by an ideal isotropic 
power
radiator 

radiating 

same 

total 

the 

 Fig 3.5 Voltage Standing Wave Ratio 

From the Fig 6.3  it is seen that the antenna yields 
minimum 
VSWR value of 1.2868 for the frequency 

9.225GHz, IV.   APPLICATION OF 

CONFORMAL ANTENNA 

In  avionics   applications    it  is  used   to  transmit  
and receive information 
In  military   aircrafts  antennas   are embedded  on 
the curvy surface to reduce aerodynamic drag. 
Since they cut costs they are used in  basic civilian 
 car  radio 
applications 
antennas  and  cellular  base  station  to  save  space 
and make it less virtually intrusive. 

train  antennas, 

like 

  They  have  been  also  used  in  cars  for  Anti  

Brake locking System.(ABS). 

  The   conformal   antenna   ahs   been   also   

used   in medical field for monitoring of body. 

V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE 
WORKS 

This 

  the 

  design 

  project 

  provides 

  and   
fabrication    of conformal  antenna  which  operates  at 
X  band.    The  proposed  design  of  conformal  antenna  is 
designed using Computer Simulation Technology (CST) 
Studio Suite software. Its return loss,  radiation  pattern,  
VSWR,  directivity,  gain  is  obtained. The   proposed   
antenna   can   be   fabricated   using   Rogers substrate.  
It  is  observed   that  the  results  are  very  good  and  it  can 
be fabricated. 

              Fig 3.4 Directivity of the antenna 

From  the Fig 3.4    it is  seen   that  the  antenna   radiates  
much  along  the  patch  side  and  radiates   less  along  the 
downside  of the antenna..  The simulated  results  show  
a directivity  of 12 dBi for frequency 9.25 GHz. 

D.   Voltage standing wave ratio of the designed 
antenna 

 For  the  desired  application  in  aircraft.  In  future, 
increasing various number of patches in the  design can 
further  enhance  the  results.  More  gain  and  directivity 
can be achieved. 

VI. REFERENCE 

[1]    
Full  Solid  Angle  Scanning  Cylindrical-and-Conical 

. 0018-926X, 2017. 

[2] Anchez-olivares    et   al.:  
compact    omnidirectional conformal array antenna in 
waveguide technology 

Department of ECE, Saveetha Engineering College, Chennai.  

Page 33 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Proceedings of International Conference on Smart Structures and Systems IC

7 

[3] 
compact omnidirectional  self-packaged  patch  antenna  
with  complementary  split-ring  resonator  loading  for 
wireless  endoscope    
Wireless  Propag. Lett., vol. 10, pp. 1532 1535, 2011. 
[4]    Pablo Sanchez-Olivares,  Raul Vinicio Haro-Baez,  
Paula Paloma   Sanchez-Dancausa,   Jose   Luis   Masa-
Campos,   and Jorge A. Ruiz-Cruz 
[5]     IET  Microw.  Antennas  Propagation.,   2016,  Vol. 
10, Iss. 
9,  pp.  926 931  927&  The  Institution  of  Engineering   
and Technology 2016 
[6]    X.    L.  Quan,   R.    L.  Li,    Y.   Fan,    and    D.    E. 
-
 IEEE  Trans. 

Antennas  Propag.,  vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 
86 93, Jan. 
2014. 
[7]   The   Fundamentals    of   Patch   Antenna    Design    
and 
Performance, Technical Media, LLC, March 
2009. 

[8] Md. Tanvir Ishtaique"ul  Huque, Md. Kamal Hosain, 
Md.  Shihabul   Islam    and  Md.  Al"Amin    Chowdhury,  
 and Performance Analysis of Microstrip Array 
 for  X"band 

Antennas  with  Optimum  Parameters 

Computer    Science   and    Applications,  Vol.  2,  No.  4, 
2011. 

design  of  Rectangular   Microstrip    Antenna    in    X  

Communication  Engineering  Vol.  1,  No.  1,  Jan.  2011, 
pp. (31-35). 
[10]    R.      Mailloux,    et      al.,      "Microstrip    array   
technology,"  Antennas 
Transactions on, vol. 29, pp. 
25"37, 
1981. 
[11] Constantine  
-  Analysis    and   
2007,  John Wiley Publications. 

and  Propagation, 

 Reprint  

IEEE 

Department of ECE, Saveetha Engineering College, Chennai.  

Page 34 

      
 
