Digital poster 2772 

Flow  2.0  -  a  flexible,  scalable,  cross-platform  post-processing  software  for  real-
time phase contrast sequences 

Pan Liu1,2, Sidy Fall1, Olivier Baledent1,2 

1 CHIMERE UR 7516, Jules Verne University, Amiens, France. 

2Medical Image Processing Department, Jules Verne University Hospital, Amiens, France. 

Summary of Main Findings (250 characters, 239/250) 
Flow 2.0 is an end-to-end easy-of-use software that allows us to quickly, robustly and accurately perform a 
batch process real-time phase contrast data, and multivariate analysis of the effect of respiration on cerebral 
fluids circulation. 

Synopsis (99/100) 
Real-time phase contrast sequences (RT-PC) has potential value as a scientific and clinical tool in quantifying 
the  effects  of  respiration  on  cerebral  circulation.  To  simplify  its  complicated  post-processing  process,  we 
developed  Flow  2.0  software,  which  provides  a  complete  post-processing  workflow  including  converting 
DICOM  data,  image  segmentation,  image  processing,  data  extraction,  background  field  correction,  anti-
aliasing filter, signal processing and analysis and a novel time-domain method for quantifying the effect of 
respiration on the cerebral circulation. This end-to-end software allows us to quickly, robustly and accurately 
perform batch process RT-PC and multivariate analysis of the effects of respiration on cerebral circulation. 

Introduction (850 words to conclusion 816/850) 
With further development of imaging techniques and instrumentation, real-time phase contrast sequences (RT-
PC) have become possible1. Compared to conventional phase-contrast sequences, its most significant feature 
is  the  quantification  of  cerebral  blood  flow  or  cerebrospinal  fluid  (CSF)  in  "real-time".  Although  not  yet 
applied  in  clinical  practice,  recent  studies  have  shown  that  RT-PC  has  a  great  potential  for  non-invasive 
quantification of the effects of respiration on cerebral fluids circulation2-4. However, the fast imaging speed 
that impairs RT-PC image quality, and a large number of images make it more difficult to post-process RT-
PC data. In general, the post-processing of RT-PC data often requires a lot of manual operations and several 
software  to  perform  the  different  steps  such  as  region  of  interest  (ROI)  segmentation,  background  field 
correction, anti-aliasing correction, extraction of flow signals, and finally quantify the effect of respiration on 
blood flow by comparing respiration and flow signals. To our knowledge, there is no post-processing software 
specifically dedicated to RT-PC data. Based on the original version5, we have developed Flow 2.0 software 
integrating  all  the  above-mentioned  features  and  allowing  a  high  level  of  automation  for  end-to-end 
quantification of the effect of respiration on cerebral blood flow.  

Methods 
Flow 2.0 was developed using IDL (Interactive Data Language) and was compiled into a 150Mb executable 
installation-free program which is available on Windows, Linux and Mac systems. Figure 1 shows the post-
processing  workflow  diagram  of  the  software,  it  contains  two  major  post-processing  steps,  the  flow 
quantification (Figure 2) and the quantification of respiratory effects (Figure 3).   

Flow quantification 

Data  extraction,  can  import  the  RT-PC  images  series  and  the  parametric  data  from  the  DICOMDIR  file 
according to the conformance statements of the different manufacturers. ROI segmentation, is consisted of 
two  semi-automatic  algorithms.  One  is  based  on  region  growth  and  active  contour  algorithms  to  segment 

 
 
 
Digital poster 2772 
vessels with large deformations or displacements during acquisition such as arteries. A second is based on a 
fully  automatic  segmentation  algorithm  in  the  frequency  domain  that  can  easily  identify  pixels  in  which 
dynamic signals are synchronized with the cardiac frequency. This one is used for ROIs with insignificant 
displacements such as CSF and venous sinuses. Background field correction, is a necessary step to correct 
eddy current-induced velocity quantization errors6. Typically, a ROI must be drawn manually in the stationary 
tissue. Our software includes a background field correction algorithm that selects automatically the stationary 
tissues around the selected ROI. It used the characteristics of the phase and amplitude in the pixel to recognize 
static tissue. Curves flows, are calculated and displayed in the viewing interface. The main key-parameters of 
the flow curve (flow rate, stroke volume, areas of the ROI, maximum velocities, …) can be automatically 
calculated and presented in the viewing interface as well as with ECG and respiratory signals if recorded. In 
addition, the software also includes anti-velocity aliasing5 and image denoising functions.  

A frequency domain signal  processing  tool  interface that is  useful for other processing  functions was also 
developed. An Export function can save all the results in a text file, easily importable by other software. 

Quantification of respiratory effects 

The first step is to separate all the individual Cardiac Cycle Flow Curve (CCFC) of the total flow calculated 
in the ROI and across the entire images of series. This Signal segmentation, automatically finds the maximum 
flows systolic points, uses them to define the period and allows to cut the continuous flow rate signal into 
multiple independent CCFCs. Signal reconstruction, the CCFCs are either labelled as expiratory interval or 
inspiratory interval based on the recorded respiratory signal. Two average expiratory and inspiratory CCFCs 
are calculated and used to compare the two respiratory periods. DiffEx-In (parameter, delay) signal, allows to 
compare  each  parameter  of  CCFC  (amplitude,  mean  flow,  stroke  volume,  cardiac  period)  between  the 
expiratory  and  the  inspiratory  period.  We  hypothesis  that  breathing  impacts  blood  and  CSF  flows  with  a 
possible delay between the flow curves and the signal recorded by the respiratory belt sensor. This delay was 
calculated by applying a phase shift on the respiratory signal interval that produce the maximum DiffEx-In for 
the  considered  parameter  of  interest.  Extraction  results,  uses  the  maximum  value  of  DiffEx-In (parameter, 
delay) to indicate the intensity and delay of the effect of respiration on this parameter of blood or CSF flow. 

Results 
Figure 4 shows an example of an in  vivo  application of the software.  The automatic  algorithm  accurately 
segmented the CSF Roi in the spinal canal. We can see the flow rate signal and the respiratory quantification 
results. 

Discussion & Conclusion 
We have developed a post-processing software for RT-PC that integrates the required functions, with a high 
degree  of  automation,  with  low  requirements  for  a  priori  knowledge  of  anatomy,  high  robustness  and 
supporting functional extensions. The software is compatible with the DICOM files generated by the MRI 
vendors. Our development makes the post-processing of RT-PC substantially easier, while also providing a 
multivariate approach to analyze the effects of respiration on cerebral fluids circulation. 

 
Digital poster 2772 
Figures (4/5) 

Figure 1: RT-PC post-processing workflow diagram of Flow 2.0. The RT-PC sequence images can be automatically 
extracted by reading the DICOMDIR file, and the flow rate signal can be extracted by the flow quantification processing 
phase (green box & figure2). The flow rate signal and the respiratory signal can be used as input parameters to quantify 
the effects of respiration on the flow signal (purple box & figure 3). 

Figure 2: Flow quantification workflow diagram.  400 phase images and 400 amplitude images of the extracranial 
section were used as input parameters, and the corrected continuous flow rate signal of internal carotid artery (ICA) was 
used as the output result. Flow 2.0 can extract multiple signals from the ROI, and only the flow rate signal is shown in 
this figure. The stationary area around the ROI (red contour line) selected by the automatic background field correction 
algorithm. 

 
 
Digital poster 2772 

Figure 3: Quantification of respiratory effects workflow diagram.  Flow rate signal of ICA and respiratory signal 
were used as input parameters. A DiffEx-In (parameter, delay) signal is generated for each parameter (amplitude, mean 
flow, stroke volume, cardiac period) and its maximum value was taken to represent the intensity and delay of the effect 
of respiration on this parameter. 

Figure 4: An in vivo application of Flow 2.0 to quantify the effect of respiration on cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in 
the extracranial section. VENC = 5cm/s, imaging speed = 96ms/image, Number image = 300. The ROI of CSF can be 
accurately defined by a fully automated fixed segmentation algorithm, flow rate signal obtained after background field 
correction (green box). Combining the respiratory signal, the effect of respiration on the four parameters of CSF flow 
can be obtained (purple box). 

 
 
 
 
Digital poster 2772 
References 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

Chen L, Beckett A, Verma A, & Feinberg D A. (2015). Dynamics of respiratory and cardiac CSF motion revealed with 
real-time simultaneous multi-slice EPI velocity phase contrast imaging. Neuroimage, 122, 281-287. 
Aktas G, Kollmeier J M, Joseph A A, Merboldt K D, Ludwig H C, Gärtner J, ... & Dreha-Kulaczewski S (2019). Spinal 
CSF flow in response to forced thoracic and abdominal respiration. Fluids and Barriers of the CNS, 16(1), 1-8. 
Balédent O, LIU P, Lokossou A, Sidy F, Metanbou  S,  Makki M  (2019). Real-time  phase contrast magnetic resonance 
imaging for assessment of cerebral hemodynamics during breathing. [Oral]. ISMRM 27th Annual Meeting & Exhibition 
in Montreal, Canada. 
Lloyd R A, Butler J E, Gandevia S C, Ball I K, Toson B, Stoodley M A, & Bilston L E (2020). Respiratory cerebrospinal 
fluid flow is driven by the thoracic and lumbar spinal pressures. The Journal of Physiology, 598(24), 5789-5805. 
Balédent O, & Idy-peretti I (2001). Cerebrospinal fluid dynamics and relation with blood flow: a magnetic resonance study 
with semiautomated cerebrospinal fluid segmentation. Investigative radiology, 36(7), 368-377. 
Holland B J, Printz B F, & Lai W W (2010). Baseline correction of phase-contrast images in congenital cardiovascular 
magnetic resonance. Journal of cardiovascular magnetic resonance, 12(1), 1-7. 

Acknowledgements 
This  research  was  supported  by  equipex  FIGURES  (Facing  Faces  Institute  Guilding  Research),  European 
Union Interreg REVERT Project, Hanuman ANR-18-CE45-0014 and Region Haut de France. 

Thanks to the staff members at the Facing Faces Institute (Amiens, France) for technical assistance. 

Thanks to David Chechin from Phillips industrie for his scientific support.  

 
 
