2
2
0
2

g
u
A
2

]
h
p
-
t
n
a
u
q
[

2
v
7
0
7
4
1
.
7
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Operational entanglement-based quantum key distribution over 50 km of
real-ﬁeld optical ﬁbres

Yoann Pelet,1, a) Gr´egory Sauder,1 Mathis Cohen,1 Laurent Labont´e,1 Olivier Alibart,1 Anthony Martin,1, b) and
S´ebastien Tanzilli1, c)
Universit´e Cˆote d’Azur, CNRS, Institut de Physique de Nice (INPHYNI), UMR 7010, 06108 Nice Cedex 2,
France

(Dated: 3 August 2022)

We present a real ﬁeld quantum key distribution link based on energy-time entanglement. Three nodes are
connected over the city of Nice by means of optical ﬁbers with a total distance of 50 km. We have implemented
a high-quality source of energy-time entangled photon pairs and actively stabilized analysers to project the
quantum states, associated with an innovative remote synchronization method of the end stations’ clocks which
does not require any dedicated channel. The system is compatible with the ITU 100 GHz standard telecom-
grid, through which a raw key rate of 40 kbps per pair of channels is obtained. A post-treatment software
performs all the necessary post-processing procedures enabling to establish secret keys in real time. All of
those embedded systems and achieved performance make this network the ﬁrst fully operational entanglement
based metropolitan quantum network to be implemented in real ﬁeld.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Quantum key distribution (QKD) oﬀers the possibility
of sharing unconditionally secure cryptographic keys
between multiple distant users. Being one of the most
mature quantum application, protocols have improved
and diversiﬁed to meet all the speciﬁc requirements of
practical secret key distribution in terms of security,
distance, and rate. QKD protocols, purely theoretical
at ﬁrst1,2, were soon tested in laboratory3 and have
been gradually extended to real ﬁeld implementations,
exploiting free-space links toward satellites4 as well
as terrestrial and underwater5 ﬁber links. The im-
proved original QKD protocol (decoy BB84)6 is used
to communicate through thousands of kilometers with
trusted nodes acting as repeaters in China7. Twin-ﬁeld
QKD has set the longest distance for a repeater-less
link8, while entanglement-based protocols (BBM92) can
connect many users at a time using various topologies,
or reach very high key rate between two users exploiting
multiplexing scheme9–11.

As described in Fig 1, we present a fully operational
QKD link over 50 km of deployed telecom ﬁber exploiting
energy-time entangled photon pairs distributed to two
users (named Alice and Bob) across the M´etropole Cˆote
d’Azur. We measure a raw keyrate of 40 kbps with a to-
tal of 20.5 dB of transmission losses, without limits for
the operation time. A fully automated stabilization pro-
tocol continuously maintains the quantum bit error rate
(QBER) under 7%. A complete post treatment program
produces a ﬁnal key rate of 6.5 kbps for one pair of ITU
channels among the 40 pairs that are available with our

a)yoann.pelet@univ-cotedazur.fr
b)anthony.martin@univ-cotedazur.fr
c)sebastien.tanzilli@univ-cotedazur.fr

multiplexing strategy.
There are three original features in our scheme. First, the
users’ clock synchronization, fundamental in QKD pro-
tocols, is carried out using the same qubits transmitted
during the QKD protocol, without requiring any addi-
tional dedicated channel12.
It allows to actively pace,
in real time, the two distant clocks with a precision of
32 ps. Second, we exploit a novel, home made, asymmet-
ric sifting protocol increasing by a factor 2 the raw key
rate and requiring one less detector compared to simi-
lar implementations13. Third, we implement a software
performing on-the-ﬂy post-treatment operations required
to transform the raw correlated bits into secured secret
keys. With those features, our network generates, contin-
uously, actual secret keys ready for practical exploitation
of secured communication over more than 32 hours. To
our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst demonstration of a fully
geared quantum link up-gradable to a network and the
longest uninterrupted run of entanglement-based QKD
in real ﬁeld.

II. CONCEPTUAL OPERATION

The photon pairs are generated via spontaneous para-
metric down conversion (SPDC) by mean of continuous
laser light sent to a non linear crystal. Thanks to the con-
servation of energy and momentum between the three in-
teracting ﬁelds, the emission time of each pair is unknown
to the coherence length of the pump laser. The photon
pair distribution is poissonnian, guaranteeing true ran-
domness of the emission time.
The measurements of the photons’ states are per-
formed randomly using two complementary basis, Z and
X, with equal probabilities (1/2). The basis and time
of arrival of the photons are recorded for each detec-
tion event. The Z basis is used to generate the key
and corresponds to the measurement of the arrival time
of the photons {| 0(cid:105), | 1(cid:105)}. The X basis is used to es-

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

FIG. 1. Experimental setup. The source, located at the central station, creates energy time bipartite entanglement shared
between Alice and Bob (end stations) using DWDM (ITU channels 20 and 22). Each analyser (Alice and Bob) sends randomly
the photons in either the Z or the X basis using a 50/50 beam splitter. The X basis is set up using two, stabilized Michelson
interferometers with the same delay, one at Alice’s station, the other at Bob’s. The Z basis consists of a 50/50 beam-splitter on
Bob’s side with a short and a long path to the detectors while Alice only has one detector, short and long paths being created
electronically. Everything is ﬁbered, with standard SMF-28 ﬁbers for all components except for the connection between the
pump laser and the PPLN waveguide ensured by a polarization maintaining ﬁber.

.

2

√

timate the eavesdropper potential information by mea-
suring two-photon interference between the two possible
arrival times {| 0(cid:105), | 1(cid:105)}, using the coherent superposition
|±(cid:105) = | 0(cid:105)±| 1(cid:105)
Time correlation and basis reconciliation occurs ev-
ery 100 ms. Bob publicly announces his photons’ detec-
tion times, measurement basis and, only for the X basis,
output bits. In her data set, Alice searches the time and
basis correlated events and sends back to Bob the event
occurring in the Z basis. Alice and Bob can then ﬁl-
ter their detection events to generate blocks of raw key
containing nZ events. Simultaneously, Alice records all
coincidence events in the X basis to compute the phases
error rates φx contributing to the QBER in the X basis:
QBERX.
The Error correction protocol is applied over blocks
of nZ bits. During the protocol, the leakage of infor-
mation (i.e., the number of bits disclosed) is given by
λEC = fEC · nEC
Z · h(Qz), where fEC is the eﬃciency of
reconciliation, h(x) the binary entropy, and Qz the error
rate in the Z basis. We use a Cascade algorithm devel-
oped in Ref.14 with a reconciliation eﬃciency of 1.06.
Privacy ampliﬁcation (PA) is the last step toward
generating a secure key. Here, k error correction blocks
are fused to create a PA block. On each PA block, Al-
ice computes the lower bound over the length l of the
secret key taking into account the ﬁnite statistic eﬀect,
l < nZ(1 − h(φu
and φu
z
the upper bound on the phase error rate estimated with

z )) − λEC, with nz = knEC
Z

the events in the Z basis. The extractor is based on a
Toeplitz-hashing function extracting l bits from the nz
input bits15.

III. EXPERIMENTAL OPERATION

A. Source

The photon pairs are emitted via spontaneous parametric
down-conversion (SPDC) from a continuous-wave (CW)
laser at 780, 10 nm with 1 MHz linewidth interacting with
a χ(2) non linear crystal. The latter is a periodically-
poled lithium niobate ridge waveguide (PPLN). Thanks
to the conservation of the energy and momentum, also
called quasi-phase matching in our case, the non-linear
interaction permits to produce degenerate paired pho-
tons at 1560.20 nm over a spectral bandwidth of 80 nm
as shown in Fig 2. The crystal has a normalized bright-
ness of 1.8 ∗ 109 pairs/nm/mW with a coupling eﬃciency
of 54.2% in a standard telecom single-mode ﬁber. For
the two users demonstration, we exploit one pair of stan-
dard 100 GHz ITU channel dense wavelength demulti-
plexers (DWDM) around the degeneracy. The channel
at λ = 1560, 61 nm and at 1559.79 nm are sent to Alice
and Bob, respectively.

More complex network topologies can be implemented
by exploiting the broadband emission of the crystal.
With the 100 GHz ITU channels, 40 independent sources

3

polarization independent 50/50 beam splitter together
with Faraday mirrors, thus avoiding the need for active
polarization stabilization. For the X basis to be able to
guarantee security in the Z basis, the path length diﬀer-
ence between the two arms of the interferometer is set
to τ , same as the delay used in the Z basis. To maxi-
mize the two-photon interference visibility, the delay of
the interferometers must satisfy the following equations:

s < τa,b < τ c
τ c
p ,
|τa − τb| (cid:28) τ c
s ,

(1)

s and τ c

where τa (τb) corresponds the delay between the arms of
Alice’s (Bob’s) interferometer, and where τ c
p are
the coherence times of the single photons and the photon
pairs, respectively. In continuous regime, the coherence
of the pairs correspond to that of the coherence time of
the pump laser (≈ 300 ns) while the coherence of the sin-
gle photons (≈ 3 fs) is given by the bandwidth of the
regarded ITU channel, i.e. 100 GHz. To satisfy the ﬁrst
relation of eq.1, we chose an interferometer path length
diﬀerence of 46 cm, i.e τa,b = 1.6 ns. The second rela-
tion imposes to make the interferometers as identical as
possible. We have |τa − τb| < 3 fs, i.e. a ﬁber length dif-
ference shorter than 100 µm, leading to a raw visibility
of 99.7% from the photon pairs. The two interferome-
ters are set up at remote locations, separated by 50 km.
Consequently, they need to be temperature stabilized to
reduce relative phase ﬂuctuations. In addition, a piezo
ﬁber-stretcher is required on the long arm of Alice’s in-
terferometer to lock the relative phase between Alice and
Bob to an appropriate value.

All photons are detected with superconducting
nanowire single photon detectors (SNSPD) IDQuantique
ID281 showing a dead-time of ∼ 50 ns and a detection
eﬃciency of 80%. Timestamps are recorded with two
time-to-digital converters (TDC - Swabian Instrument
Timetagger Ultra) showing 1 ps resolution. The combi-
nation of the detector and TDC jitters give a coincidence
peak with a FWHM of 100 ps.
The SNSPDs employed in our QKD system have a me-
ander pattern which introduces polarisation-dependent
eﬃciency16. In ﬁbers, the polarisation rotates over time,
which creates instability of the secret key rate generated
by the system. To overcome this issue, two electrical ad-
justable polarisation controllers are placed at the output
of the source and are constantly adjusted to maximize
the number of detection events at Alice’s and Bob’s.

C. Quantum channel

The QKD protocol is operated over a dedicated optical
ﬁber network deployed over the M´etropole Cˆote d’Azur.
As shown in Fig 1, the analysers at Alice and Bob’s are
located in Nice and Sophia Antipolis, with the source
placed in-between the two sites. More speciﬁcally, we ex-
ploit two standard, telecom, single-mode dark ﬁbers. The

FIG. 2. Spectrum of the photon pairs generated from the
nonlinear crystal inside of the photon pair source.

of energy-time entangled photon-pairs can be operated
in parallel9. This allows either to create a 40 users fully
connected network or to increase the keyrate of a sin-
gle QKD link by 40 times. These numbers can go even
higher by using 50 GHz or 25 GHz DWDM.

B. Analysers

Each analyser allows for a passive basis choice between
X and Z (a Michelson interferometer or a straight detec-
tion line) thanks to a 50/50 ﬁbered a beam-splitter, i.e.
PZ = PX = 1

2 , as shown in FIG. 1.

The Z basis decodes the incoming photons using a
short and a long path separed by a time delay τ . As
shown in Fig 1 on Bob’s side, a 50/50 beam-splitter con-
nected to detectors ”0” and ”1”, each corresponding to a
bit value of the raw key. The delay τ is added on the arm
corresponding to the bit ”1”. On Alice’s side, we employ
only one detector connected to two channels of the time
to digital converter (TDC) with an electrical delay τ be-
tween the two. Similarly to Bob’s side, the channel with
a delay corresponds to the bit ”1” while the other is ref-
fered to as ”0”. Every detection event on Alice’s Z basis
leads to the measurement of both | 0(cid:105) and | 1(cid:105). However,
comparing both detection times with Bob’s timestamps
allows Alice to know whether Bob has measured | 0(cid:105) or
| 1(cid:105) by post-selecting only the ones with a zero coinci-
dence delay. To properly distinguish between | 0(cid:105) and
| 1(cid:105), the delay τ must be larger than the timing jitter of
the coincidence detection electronics. Usually, time bin
encoding is done using two diﬀerent optical paths of dif-
ferent length leading to the detection of | 0(cid:105) or | 1(cid:105). The
choice between these two paths being passive, the prob-
ability that both photons take the same path and create
an exploitable coincidence is 25%. Our scheme allows to
bypass the passive choice between the two paths on Al-
ice’s side, improving to 50% the probability of recording
a coincidence.

The X basis monitors the visibility of the interfer-
ence induced by the photon pairs using unbalanced ﬁber
Michelson interferometers. Two-photon interference hap-
pens independently of the incoming polarization by using

ﬁbers induce 5.7 dB and 10.5 dB of losses from the source
to Alice’s or Bob’s end station, respectively. Chromatic
dispersion along the ﬁbers broadens the peaks in the co-
incidence histogram, leading to a decrease of the signal
to noise ratio in the coincidence window17. This makes
the use of a dispersion compensation module mandatory.
Energy-time entangled photon-pair allows nonlocal dis-
persion cancellation, such that the eﬀect of dispersion on
one photon can be canceled out by the dispersion ex-
perienced by its correlated photon18. Therefore, a 50 km
ﬁber dispersion compensation module, inducing 4.3 dB of
additional losses, is added before Alice’s analyser to com-
pensate the dispersion accumulated by the photon-pairs.
By placing the module on Alice’s path, the transmission
losses between the two users are balanced.

As detailed in table I, the analysers add on aver-
age 11 dB before each detector for both X basis, 6 dB
for Bob’s Z basis and 3 dB for Alice’s Z basis. The
losses between the source and the analysers are standard
numbers when it comes to classical telecommunication
(≈ 0.3 dB/km). At the analysers, losses are mostly due
to the beam splitters, while the interferometers also in-
duce 2 dB of extra losses due to the splices and Faraday
mirrors. The latter cannot be reduced drastically and
are inherent to the protocol itself. We can assume that
any deployed metropolitan quantum network in the fu-
ture will have to deal with similar characteristics when
using standard telecommunication ﬁbers.

IV. DATA POST-TREATMENT

All data acquisition and post-treatment operations are
automatically performed using a homemade Labview
software which performs, in real time, every calculation
and stabilization from the detection events to the gener-
ation of the secure key on Alice and Bob sides.

Our QKD protocol heavily relies on the precision of the
recorded arrival times of the photons at Alice’s and Bob’s
detectors. To measure those, two independent TDCs are
used, one on each site. When a detection occurs, the
TDC generate a 64 bits time-tag corresponding to the
elapsed time between the start of the device and the ar-
rival time of the photon. The time-tagging precision re-
lies on that of the clock used as a reference. When using
two distant devices, two synchronization problems need
to be addressed:
i) deﬁning a time zero, and ii) main-
taining the same clock rate on both systems.

During the initialization of the QKD system, the laser
beam is blocked by an electronically tunable optical at-

Detector
AZ AX1 AX2 BZ1 BZ2 BX1 BX2
Losses (dB) 12.6 20.33 20.46 15.86 16.22 21.83 22.47

TABLE I. Losses from the source to each detector, with A
and B for Alice and Bob and X and Z for the measurement
basis.

4

tenuator. When unblocking the light, the SPDC source
starts to generate pairs of photons that are subsequently
separated and sent simultaneously to Alice and Bob. On
each side, an algorithmic ﬁltering function veriﬁes, every
millisecond, if the number of detection is largely greater
than the dark-count rate of the detectors. When the de-
tection rate becomes large enough, the two TDCs send a
block of detection acquisitions of 100 ms. In this block,
the diﬀerence between the two ﬁrst time-tags recorded
by Alice and Bob corresponds to the delay between cor-
related events. The time tagger functions allow to get
this ﬁrst delay with a precision better than 10 ns. Alice
performs a correlation calculation on one set of acquisi-
tion blocks around the delay found with the ﬁrst time-tag
event and looks for the coincidence peak. The identiﬁca-
tion of this peak allows to deﬁne the zero delay between
the two TDCs with a precision of about 1 ns. Once this is
done, the time window for the correlation can be reduced
to 80 ns and the precision of the zero delay measurement
improves to 32 ps for the next blocks of raw keys.

While absolutely necessary, getting a precise initial-
ization time does not guarantee an everlasting synchro-
nization. Two independent clocks drift apart over time.
However, our system requires at all times, a clock syn-
chronization better than the coincidence window used to
validate correlated detection events which is set at 128 ps.
The Time-Taggers internal clocks show a drift of 100 ns/s.
When replaced by a rubidium atomic clocks (Spectra-
time LNRClock 1500), the drift lowers to 100 ps/s. Even
though, the cumulative drift over one day is largely
greater than the coincidence window. 24/7 operation of
the link requires active synchronization of Alice’s and
Bob’s clocks. To do so, a new coincidence calculation is
performed every second, to measure the evolution of the
zero delay and therefore to adjust the internal frequency
of the Alice’s clock. This active correction ensures that
the clocks’ synchronization is always better than 32 ps.

This kind of stabilization does not require any ded-
icated channel7. The drift measurement is straightfor-
wardly done by exploiting the entanglement resource
used to perform the QKD protocol and does not lower
It also allows to comply with the optical
the keyrate.
length ﬂuctuation of the quantum channel. All those per-
turbations normally aﬀect the synchronization over long
time scales but are here simply and constantly corrected.
For each acquisition block received from Bob, Alice
performs the sifting to extract the time tags and basis
of all the correlated events. Alice sends back to Bob the
relevant events obtained in the Z basis to allow the gener-
ation of the key, while she keeps the events in the X basis
to compute the QBERx . The events in the Z basis are ac-
cumulated to generate a correction block of nc
Z = 16384
bits and send to the error correction function based on
a cascade algorithm. The QBERx is calculated for each
correction block and the value is used as input of a feed-
back loop algorithm minimizing the QBERx by changing
the voltage applied to the piezo ﬁber-stretcher located
in Alice’s interferometer. Lastly, after the accumulation

of 100 correction blocks, i.e. nz = 1.6384 × 106, the se-
cret key length is computed taking into account the ﬁnite
statistic eﬀect via the security proof described in Ref19.
The corrected key is then sent to a privacy ampliﬁcation
function based on a Toeplitz-hashing extractor to com-
pute the ﬁnal secret key on both sides. All operations
from data acquisition to privacy ampliﬁcation are per-
formed simultaneously between Alice’s and Bob’s com-
puters, allowing the link to operate continuously without
any down-time required for post-treatment.

5

V. RESULTS

A. Optimization of the secret key rate

FIG. 3. Simulated SKR (blue) and QBERz (red) as a function
of µ : the number of photon pairs outputing from the source
per time wondow (128 ps).

The value of the SKR (Secret Key Rate) results from a
competition between the number of entangled photons
detected and the error rate in the recorded detection
events. These values depend on several parameters: the
photon-pairs generation probability, the losses, the detec-
tors’ dark counts, the size of the coincidence windows and
the imperfection in the source and the analysers. After
characterising the losses induced by the transmission of
the photons from the source to both users, those induced
by the analysers and the intrinsic errors of the system,
we have simulated the evolution of the SKR and QBERz
as a function of the photon-pair generation probability
per windows of interest, as shown in FIG. 3. We choose
a coincidence window in the post-treatment of 128 ps,
which is the smallest size we can set before loosing too
much coincidence events due to detection timing-jitter
and residual clock drift.

Increasing the pump power augments the amount of
information shared per second, resulting in a higher SKR.
However, the higher the power, the higher the probability
of generating double pairs of photons (two diﬀerent pairs
emitted within the same time window), which increases
the QBER. To ensure unconditional security, all errors in
the detection events have to be considered as potential
eavesdropper’s actions. Therefore, to compensate for the
double pair induced errors, more bits of the raw key have
to be sacriﬁced to create the secret key resulting in a
decrease of the SKR. Therefore, the optimal SKR is found
for the highest pump power before reaching a critical rate
of double pairs. We ﬁnd the optimal value for the QBER
to be 5.0% in the Z basis for an optimal SKR.

As shown in FIG. 4, the results obtained experimen-
tally in the optimal conﬁguration lead to an average SKR
of 6.5 kbps. We perform a continuous measurement last-
ing 31 h, before a helium condensation cycle is necessary
for our SNSPD system. As we can see, all feedback loops
of the system act on the diﬀerent devices to maintain
both the QBER and SKR during the entire operation
time. The SKR depicted here corresponds to an exper-
imental value of secrets bits stored on a hard drive on
each user’s computer than can be directly used as cryp-
tographic keys. To our knowledge, this makes our im-

FIG. 4. Secret Key Rate (top) and QBER in both basis (bot-
tom) as a function of time for a 30h uninterrupted run.

plementation the ﬁrst fully automated and operational
deployed entanglement-based quantum link.

VI. CONCLUSION

We have demonstrated a fully functional and automated
quantum key distribution system, operated over 50 km
of deployed standard telecom ﬁbers, allowing to estab-
lish shared secret keys between two distant users. All
processing steps required to perform the key distillation
protocol are implemented on a single computer on each
site. This is, to our knowledge, the ﬁrst implementa-
tion of an entanglement-based QKD protocol with auto-

mated and continuous post-treatment and synchroniza-
tion. To reach such a level of operationability, we have
also achieved a simple and eﬃcient way to synchronize
distant users without requiring extra physical channel or
speciﬁc dedicated data. The secure keyrate reached over
the link is 6.5 kbps on average for a single pair of DWDM
channels and could theoretically reach 7 kbps with ideal
stabilization processes. Lastly, more users can be added
to the link by connecting them to the source using mul-
tiplexing strategies, leading to more complex and intere-
stong topologies. This physical conﬁguration would allow
to make a fully connected network with up to 40 users
using only standard 100 GHz DWDM20.

DATA AVAILABILITY

Data are available from the authors on reasonable re-
quest.

REFERENCES

and

1C. H. Bennett and G. Brassard, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on Com-
puters, Systems and Signal Processing, Bangalore, India,
, 175
(1984).
2C. H. Bennett, G. Brassard, and N. D. Mermin, Phys. Rev. Lett.
68, 557 (1992).
3C. H. Bennett, F. Bessette, G. Brassard, L. Salvail,
J. Smolin, J. Cryptol. 5, 3 (1992).
4S.-K. Liao, W.-Q. Cai, W.-Y. Liu, L. Zhang, Y. Li, J.-G. Ren,
J. Yin, Q. Shen, Y. Cao, Z.-P. Li, et al., Nature 549, 43 (2017).
5S. Wengerowsky, S. K. Joshi, F. Steinlechner, J. R. Zichi, S. M.
Dobrovolskiy, R. van der Molen, J. W. Los, V. Zwiller, M. A. Ver-
steegh, A. Mura, et al., Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 116, 6684 (2019).
6W.-Y. Hwang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 057901 (2003).
7Y.-A. Chen, Q. Zhang, T.-Y. Chen, W.-Q. Cai, S.-K. Liao,
J. Zhang, K. Chen, J. Yin, J.-G. Ren, Z. Chen, S.-L. Han, Q. Yu,
K. Liang, F. Zhou, X. Yuan, M.-S. Zhao, T.-Y. Wang, X. Jiang,
L. Zhang, W.-Y. Liu, Y. Li, Q. Shen, Y. Cao, C.-Y. Lu, R. Shu,
J.-Y. Wang, L. Li, N.-L. Liu, F. Xu, X.-B. Wang, C.-Z. Peng,
and J.-W. Pan, Nature 589, 214 (2021).
8J.-P. Chen, C. Zhang, Y. Liu, C. Jiang, W.-J. Zhang, Z.-Y. Han,
S.-Z. Ma, X.-L. Hu, Y.-H. Li, H. Liu, F. Zhou, H.-F. Jiang, T.-Y.
Chen, H. Li, L.-X. You, Z. Wang, X.-B. Wang, Q. Zhang, and
J.-W. Pan, arXiv:2102.00433 [quant-ph] (2021), 2102.00433.
9D. Aktas, B. Fedrici, F. Kaiser, T. Lunghi, L. Labont´e, and
S. Tanzilli, Laser & Photon. Rev. 10, 451 (2016).

10F. Appas, F. Baboux, M. I. Amanti, A. Lema´ıtre, F. Boitier,

E. Diamanti, and S. Ducci, npj Quant. Inf. 7, 1 (2021).

11S. P. Neumann, M. Selimovic, M. Bohmann, and R. Ursin, arXiv

2107.07756 (2021).

12C. Ho, A. Lamas-Linares, and C. Kurtsiefer, New J. Phys. 11,

045011 (2009).

13S. P. Neumann, A. Buchner, L. Bulla, M. Bohmann,

and

R. Ursin, arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.12417 (2022).

14J. Martinez-Mateo, C. Pacher, M. Peev, A. Ciurana, and V. Mar-

tin, arXiv:1407.3257 [quant-ph] (2014), 1407.3257.

15C. Bennett, G. Brassard, C. Crepeau, and U. Maurer, IEEE

Trans. Inform. Theory 41, 1915 (1995).

16F. Zheng, R. Xu, G. Zhu, B. Jin, L. Kang, W. Xu, J. Chen, and

P. Wu, Sci. Rep. 6, 1 (2016).

17S. Fasel, N. Gisin, G. Ribordy, and H. Zbinden, Eur. Phys. J. D

30, 143 (2004).

6

18A. Steinberg, P. Kwiat, and R. Chiao, Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 2421

(1992).

19R. Y. Cai and V. Scarani, New J. Phys. 11, 045024 (2009).
20S. K. Joshi, D. Aktas, S. Wengerowsky, M. Lonˇcari´c, S. P. Neu-
mann, B. Liu, T. Scheidl, G. C. Lorenzo, ˇZ. Samec, L. Kling,
et al., Sci. Adv. 6, eaba0959 (2020).

21C. H. Bennett, G. Brassard, and N. D. Mermin, Phy. Rev. Lett.

68, 557 (1992).

22L. Calderaro, A. Stanco, C. Agnesi, M. Avesani, D. Dequal,
P. Villoresi, and G. Vallone, Phys. Rev. Appl. 13, 054041 (2020).

23Z. Feng, S. Li, and Z. Xu, Opt. Express 29, 8725 (2021).

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work has been conducted within the framework of
the French government ﬁnancial support managed by the
Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR), within its In-
vestments for the Future programme, under the Univer-
sit´e Cˆote d’Azur UCA-JEDI project (Quantum@UCA,
ANR-15-IDEX-01), and under the Strat´egie Nationale
Quantique through the PEPR QComtestbeds project
(ANR 22-PETQ-0011). This work has also been con-
ducted within the framework of the OPTIMAL project,
funded by the European Union and the Conseil R´egional
SUD-PACA by means of the ’Fonds Europ´eens de
d´eveloppement regional’ (FEDER). The authors also ac-
knowledge ﬁnancial support from the Conseil R´egional
SUD-PACA through the INTRIQUE (APEX2019) and
SIPS (Apex 2021) projects. The authors are grateful to
S. Canard, A. Ouorou, L. Chotard, L. Londeix from Or-
ange & Orange Labs for their support, and to Orange
for the installation and the connection of the dark ﬁbers
between the three diﬀerent sites of our network, as well
as for all the support they provided for their characteri-
zation. The authors also thank the M´etropole Nice Cˆote
d’Azur and the Inria Centre at Universit´e Cˆote d’Azur
for the access to their buildings and for their continu-
ous help in making this network a reality. The authors
also acknowledge IDQuantique and Swabian Instruments
GmbH teams for all the technical support and the devel-
opment of new features that were needed for the imple-
mentation of our operational QKD system and related
experiment. Finally, Y. Pelet acknowledges PhD funding
from Accenture and Universit´e Cˆote d’Azur.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

Y.P., G.S., L.L., and A.M. performed the experiments.
A.M., O.A., L.L., and S.T. designed the protocols and re-
lated experiments. G.S. and A.M. performed all software
and hardware implementation. Y.P., M.C., and A.M.
performed the numerical simulations. Y.P., LL., O.A.,
A.M., and S.T. wrote the paper. A.M., O.A., and S.T.
supervised the work.

COMPETING INTERESTS

The authors declare no competing interests.

7

