2
2
0
2

l
u
J

2

]
t
f
o
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[

1
v
0
7
7
0
0
.
7
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

The ABC of scale invariance at the level of action integrals,
and the software tool Kanon

R. Dengler∗

July 5, 2022

Abstract

A central and common aspect of renormalizable ﬁeld theories is scale invariance of the action
integral. This note introduces the software tool Kanon 1, which allows to assemble arbitrary
action integrals interactively, and to determine their critical dimension and scale invariance. The
tool contains more than 60 well-known models with comments and references to the literature.

Contents

1 Introduction

2 Scale invariance of action integrals at the critical dimension

3 Scaling below or above the critical dimension

4 Dimensionless ﬁelds

5 Symmetries between ﬁelds

6 Field theories in wavevector space

7 Statistical physics and particle physics

8 Connection with the ﬁeld theoretic renormalization group

8.1 At the critical dimension . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8.2 Below or above the critical dimension . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8.3 Non-renormalizable ﬁeld theories

9 Some special cases

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9.1 Sine Gordon model
9.2 Kondo-eﬀect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

10 Classiﬁcation of renormalizible ﬁeld theories, signature

10.1 Additional marginal monomials

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

11 Summary

∗ORCID: 0000-0001-6706-8550
1Available at Sourceforge, https://sourceforge.net/projects/kanon/

1

2

2

4

5

5

5

5

6
6
6
7

7
7
7

8
9

9

 
 
 
 
 
 
1 Introduction

The ﬁeld theoretic renormalization group has applications throughout physics, but the huge number
of ﬁeld theories, their diﬀerent forms, as well as diﬀerent regularization and renormalization schemes
may appear confusing.

It is all the more important to understand scale invariance at the lowest order, scale invariance
at the level of the action integral. In a way and to some extent, a ﬁeld theory is understood with the
scale invariance of its action integral. The perturbative renormalization in principle is pure formalism
and only adds some (often small) “anomalous” dimensions or possibly logarithmic factors.

The degrees of freedom in the renormalization procedure (which terms need a coupling constant,
which terms can be kept ﬁxed, which scale factors are required, ...) already appear at the level of
the action integral. This note describes the mathematics and physics of the algorithms used in the
Kanon tool. Although simple in principle, this may be useful to know also without the tool.

2 Scale invariance of action integrals at the critical dimension

Scale invariance of the action integral is a central and common aspect of most renormalizable ﬁeld
theories. Formalizing scale invariance considerations requires some conventions and some linear
algebra. An example is the Ginzburg-Landau-Wilson type action integral

(cid:90)

(cid:16)

ddx

S1 =

aϕ∇2ϕ + u (cid:0)ϕ2(cid:1)2 + gϕ∇4ϕ + w (cid:0)ϕ2(cid:1)3 + vϕ2∇2ϕ2 + rϕ2 + h · ϕ

(cid:17)

(1)

describing several universality classes. The action integral S1 like most other ones is local in real
space, but it is customary to always talk of dimensions of wave vectors k (and frequencies) instead of
coordinates x (and time) in the renormalization group context. The terms of an action integral are
equivalent to monomials of wavevectors (or frequencies) and ﬁelds because of scaling equivalences
y ,(cid:82) dt ∼ ω−1 and δ (y) ∼ y−1. It generally suﬃces to
like x ∼ k−1, ∇ ∼ k, (cid:82) ddx ∼ k−d, (cid:82) dy ∼ k−1
have one d-dimensional space apart from possibly other one-dimensional spaces.

An action integral can be scale invariant under a rescaling

km → kmb[km],
ϕm → ϕmb[ϕm]

of coordinates k and ﬁelds ϕ with an arbitrary scaling factor b (cid:54)= 0 and constant scaling dimensions
N = {[km] , [ϕm]}. The scaling dimension corresponding to the d-dimensional space, [k1] = − [x1] =
1, is one by deﬁnition. In the language of dimensional analysis this means that the scaling dimensions
N count wave vector factors.

In general, there are several types of wavevectors km (or coordinates) and several types of ﬁelds
ϕm, but the cartesian components of an isotropic (or relativistically invariant) space all scale with
the same scaling dimension and need not be distinguished. Likewise, the components of a tensor- or
spinor-valued ﬁeld all scale with the same scaling dimension, and count as one ﬁeld as far as scaling
is concerned.

This leads to the concept of a model order M , the sum of the number of coordinates and ﬁelds
with independent scaling dimensions. The model order of the action integral (1) is 2, there is one
ﬁeld and one coordinate.

Scale invariance of the n-th monomial of an action integral leads to a linear equation

M
(cid:88)

m=1

En,mNm = 0,

2

(2)

for the scaling dimensions, where the exponent matrix E is integer-valued, and contains a row for
each monomial of the action integral, a column for each coordinate and a column for each ﬁeld.

The exponent matrix for the action integral (1) reads

E =













2 − d 2
−d
4
4 − d 2
6
−d
2 − d 4
2
−d
1
−d













.

(3)

Eq.(2) contains M unknowns: M − 1 scaling dimensions N and the space dimension d. This means
that M rows of eq.(2) or M monomials of the action integral suﬃce to determine N and d.

By arranging the monomials of the action in appropriate order, it always is possible to use the
ﬁrst M rows of E, which form a square matrix E(cid:3) (that is, the ﬁrst M monomials of the action
integral, if there is any solution at all). A nontrivial solution of eq.(2) then only exists for det E(cid:3) = 0,
and this equation determines the critical dimension d = dc. Diﬀerent pairs (M −tupels) of rows from
E from Gl.(3) lead to diﬀerent scale invariant ﬁeld theories. Their critical dimensions are 4 (standard
ϕ4-model), 3 (tricritical point), 8 (Lifshitz point) and 6 (tricritical Lifshitz point).

Once M rows or monomials are selected and the critical dimension dc and the scaling dimen-
sions N = {[km] , [ϕm]} are determined, no degrees of freedom remain for the other rows of eq.(2)
(monomials of the action integral). These monomials may be consistent with the scaling (marginal)
or inconsistent (relevant or irrelevant).

There is a simple geometric picture for the scale invariance of an action in an M -dimensional
exponent space. The exponents En,m of a monomial with index n are points in this space with
integer coordinates. The scaling dimensions N deﬁne a vector in the exponent space, and equation
(2) says, that row n of the exponent matrix (the nth monomial of the action integral) must be
orthogonal to the vector N . In other words, the monomials of a scale invariant ﬁeld theory lie on a
hyperplane through the origin perpendicular to N .

The exponents En,m contain the a priori unknown dimension d, but according to En,m = E(0)
n,m −
δm,1Dnd the dimension d only enters as a translation in the k1 direction. In most cases all monomials
contain exactly one d-dimensional integral, and Dn = 1. For E(0)

n,m scale invariance then requires

M
(cid:88)

m=1

E(0)

n,mNm = d,

(4)

and the critical dimension can be read oﬀ at the intersection of the hyperplane spanned by the
monomials E(0)

n,m with the k1-axis.

This is shown for action (1) in ﬁg.(1). Geometrically, equations (4) state that the exponents E(0)
n,m
of marginal monomials can be interpreted as points on a hyperplane in a model-order dimensional
exponent space. The hyperplane is orthogonal to the vector N of scaling dimensions. The critical
dimensions dc together with the scaling dimensions N are a (not unique) signature for a scale
invariant action integral.

To summarize, a scale invariance of an action integral requires selecting model oder monomials
of the action integral. These monomials deﬁne a hyperplane in exponent space and determine the
critical dimension and the scaling dimensions. It then may turn out that more (or even an inﬁnite
number of) monomials are consistent with the scale invariance.

3

Figure 1: The exponent space for action integral (1) with model order M = 2. A hyperplane
represents a model with a critical point. Monomials on the upper right of a hyperplane are relevant for
large wavevectors and irrelevant for small wavevectors. Monomials on the lower left of a hyperplane
are relevant for small wavevectors and irrelevant for large wavectors.

3 Scaling below or above the critical dimension

The algebra decribed above must be extended to d (cid:54)= dc when the actual space dimension d diﬀers
from the critical dimension dc or when dimensional regularization is to be used. Scale invariance is
possible for d (cid:54)= dc if a coupling constant is assigned to one of the ﬁrst M monomials of the action
integral. Which of the ﬁrst M monomials is assigned a coupling constant is more or less is a matter
of taste.2

The coupling constant then also gets a wave vector dimension and takes part in the scaling.
The coupling constant adds a column to the exponent matrix and a row to the vector of scaling
dimensions N , but the ﬁrst column of the exponent matrix and the value N1 = 1 are known and
can be moved to the r.h.s. of eq.(2). The d-dependent scaling dimensions then follow by inverting
the resulting M × M matrix. The wavevector dimension of the coupling constant is of order O ((cid:15)),
with (cid:15) = dc − d.

The resulting scale invariance of the action integral looks like a renormalization group ﬂow for
the coupling constant. This ﬂow of coupling constants with a naive scaling dimension of order O ((cid:15))
is a part of the physical coupling constant ﬂow, but has a physical meaning only when combined
with the contribution from perturbation theory, which has the same order of magnitude.

No degrees of freedom are left once the M × M -equation is solved, and in general all monomials

after the ﬁrst M monomials need a coupling constant.3

The software tool Kanon always determines the critical dimension and the canonical scaling
dimensions from the ﬁrst M monomials of the action integral, and allows to shift monomials up and
down by drag and drop.

Shifting monomials with a coupling constant of order O ((cid:15)) (marginal, on the same hyperplane)
corresponds to arbitrary assignments in the renormalization scheme (which of the ﬁrst M vertex
functions are kept ﬁxed, which one of them has a coupling constant). The canonical dimensions in
general change at order O ((cid:15)), but the physical scaling dimensions remain the same.

In contrast, when monomials with a coupling constant of order O (1) (relevant or irrelevant, on
a diﬀerent hyperplane) are shifted to the ﬁrst M monomials, a diﬀerent universality class (another
hyperplane, or none at all) gets selected. See also ﬁg.(1).

2It is possible to assign a coupling constant to several of the ﬁrst model order monomials, but the solution then
is not unique. In the Kanon tool a unique solution can be enforced by adding a constraint monomial (unphysical) to
the action integral.

3In some cases it turns out that there are relations between these coupling constants. Examples are nonlinear gauge

theories and mode couplings in critical dynamics.

4

4 Dimensionless ﬁelds

The number of possible marginal monomials is ﬁnite as long as the hyperplane is not parallel to
some ﬁeld axis, i.e., as long as all scaling dimensions N diﬀer from zero. It sometimes occurs that
some ﬁeld ϕm is dimensionless, [ϕm] = 0. Geometrically this means that the hyperplane is parallel
to the ﬁeld exponent axis, and that it intersects an unlimited number of lattice points (ﬁg.(1)).
Multiplying any marginal monomial of the action integral with any power of ϕm generates another
marginal monomial, and in principle an inﬁnite set of monomials are marginal and must be taken
into account.

The ﬁeld theory and perturbative renormalization might still make sense. Some monomials might
be forbidden by symmetry and not generated by perturbation theory. Or the perturbative expansion
only involves these monomials step by step, and an iterative procedure is possible. But the situation
always should be examined meticulously. Examples of ﬁeld theories with a dimensionless ﬁeld are
nonlinear sigma models, the KPZ (Kardar, Parisi, Zhang) interface growth model, the Sine-Gordon
model and the Wilson-Cowan neural network model.

5 Symmetries between ﬁelds

Some action integrals are symmetric under an exchange of two ﬁelds. An example is the Fermi action
of beta decay[2]

(cid:90)

SF =

ddx ¯ψ (γ · ∂ + m) ψ + (cid:0) ¯ψγ (1 − γ5) ψ(cid:1) · (cid:0) ¯ψγ (1 − γ5) ψ(cid:1) .

The model order is three. The mass m is irrelevant for large wavevectors, and there remain two
monomials in SF - not enough to determine dc, [ψ] and (cid:2) ¯ψ(cid:3). But because of the symmetry ψ ↔ ¯ψ it
suggests itself to require [ψ] = (cid:2) ¯ψ(cid:3). This amounts to using only one ﬁeld in the dimensional analysis,
or to adding a constraint monomial ¯ψψ−1 to SF (only for the scaling analysis, without any integrals!).
Any other constraint term like ψ or ¯ψψ3 not symmetric under the ψ ↔ ¯ψ symmetry also does the
job, even if this makes a ﬁeld dimensionless. In fact, the two ﬁelds always occur in pairs, and only
the sum of the dimensions [ψ] + (cid:2) ¯ψ(cid:3) has physical meaning.

6 Field theories in wavevector space

In situations where a Fermi shell plays a role the ﬁeld theory must be written down in k-space.
Examples are the Fermi liquid with a four-point-interaction (superconductivity) and the Kondo eﬀect.
The algorithm used in Kanon for the dimensional analysis is oblivious to whether a “coordinate”
denotes a coordinate or a wavevector. However, to get the correct sign for the scaling dimensions
requires to set a ﬂag for the coordinate. And of course, dimensions of ﬁelds and Fourier transforms
of ﬁelds diﬀer by the dimensions of the Fourier transform integrals.

7 Statistical physics and particle physics

With respect to scale invariance and the renormalization group there essentially is no diﬀerence
In the latter case the action
between ﬁeld theories of statistical physics and of particle physics.
occurs with a factor i in the path integral, but this does not aﬀect the essence of the renormalization
group formalism.

The actual diﬀerence is the perspective. In statistical physics a system with atoms or molecules
and usually a lattice is given, which deﬁnes an ultraviolett cutoﬀ (UV), and one is interested in the
behavior at decreasing wavevectors (long wavelengths, “infrared”, IR).

5

In partice physics the starting point is the physics at small wavevectors (low energy), and the
question is how this came about or what will happen at high energies. Accordingly, one is interested
in the behaviour for growing wavevectors.

A primitive example is the action S = (cid:82) ddx (cid:0)(∇ϕ)2 + mϕ2(cid:1). The mass term mϕ2 dominates for
small wavevectors (it is relevant) in comparison to (∇ϕ)2, and this is what is of interest in statistical
physics. In contrast, for large wavevectors (particle physics) the mass term is negligible (irrelevant).
The diﬀerence only is the perspective.

8 Connection with the ﬁeld theoretic renormalization group

Scale invariance of an action integral is a precondition for renormalizability, and a scaling analysis
always should be the ﬁrst step of a renormalization group calculation. The action integral must con-
tain all types of marginal interactions, in particular if such interactions are generated by perturbation
theory and/or are allowed by symmetry. If these preconditions are met, then renormalizibility is the
rule rather than the exception.

The naive scaling at the level of the action integral contains the gist of scale invariance, but
this exact classical symmetry is broken when ﬂuctuations are taken into account (an example of an
“anomaly”).

The actual scaling dimensions of the ﬁelds and coordinates and the ﬂow of the coupling constants
only follow from a renormalization group calculation. The ﬁeld theoretic renormalization group is
perturbative in nature, and gives reliable results only for small coupling constants. The corrections
to the naive scaling then also are small. However complicated the calculations are, there remain a
few typical possibilities.

8.1 At the critical dimension

In the vicinity of the trivial ﬁxed point (with vanishing coupling constants) the renormalization
group adds small logarithmic corrections to the naive scaling. If the ﬁxed point is stable, then this
in principle is the complete answer.

Examples are quantum chromodynamics with asymptotic freedom (UV stable trivial ﬁxed point),
or the standard ϕ4-model in four dimensions with an IR-stable ﬁxed point, or the Uniaxial magnet
with dipolar interaction in three dimensions, also with a stable IR ﬁxed point.

If the ﬁxed point is unstable, then one knows the physics near the ﬁxed point. But some coupling
constant grows, and the ultimate behaviour away from the ﬁxed point cannot be described with
the pertubative renormalization group. Examples are quantum electrodynamics (UV unstable ﬁxed
point), quantum chromodynamics (IR unstable ﬁxed point, conﬁnement) and the Kondo eﬀect also
with an IR unstable ﬁxed point. A Fermi liquid corresponds to an IR stable ﬁxed point in any space
dimension, but this ﬁxed point is unstable under an attractive two-particle interaction (ultimately
leading to superconductivity).

8.2 Below or above the critical dimension

Below (or sometimes above) the critical dimension dc an expansion parameter is (cid:15) = dc − d, and
there may be ﬁxed points of the coupling constant ﬂow equations of order O ((cid:15)).

If there are stable ﬁxed points for the coupling constants, then there are (cid:15)-expansions for critical
exponents and other quantities. This typically is the case in critical statics and critical dynamics,
and for systems of the reaction-diﬀusion type (e.g. percolation).

If one is more interested in numerical values instead of in exact (cid:15)-expansions, it also is possible
to perform the renormalization group calculations directly in the given dimension d, and to expand
quantities in the renormalized coupling constants (provided these are small in d dimensions).

6

8.3 Non-renormalizable ﬁeld theories

Quantum ﬁeld theories are not renormalizable above their critical dimension.[3] Technically this
means that there is a relevant interaction, and that the degree of divergence of diagrams for a vertex
increases with the number of interactions. No ﬁnite number of subtractions renders the vertex ﬁnite.
Such ﬁeld theories still can make sense at tree level, as eﬀective ﬁeld theories. Examples are Fermi
theory of weak interactions and Einstein-Hilbert gravitation[2], both with a critical (spacetime)
dimension two.

9 Some special cases

There are some peculiar cases of renormalizable ﬁeld theories, where a naive scaling analysis as
described above can be misleading or somewhat involved.

9.1 Sine Gordon model

A monomial of the action integral can be strongly but dangerously irrelevant. This means that the
monomial rapidly scales to zero according to naive scaling analysis (it is not on the hyperplane), but
must be kept nevertheless. An example is the Sine-Gordon model[3] with action

(cid:90)

Ssg =

ddx (cid:8)(∇ϕ)2 − α cos ϕ(cid:9) .

One of several pecularities of the Sine-Gordon model is that one coupling constant suﬃces for all
powers of ϕ2 in the cos ϕ series. The cos-function can only play a role in this way if ϕ is dimensionless.
The ﬁrst monomial then is marginal for d = 2, while the cos ϕ would be marginal for d = 0, but is
strongly relevant in two dimensions.

A more standard version of the action contains an auxiliary ﬁeld4 σ,

(cid:90)

ddx

S(cid:48)

sg =

(cid:110)

(∇ϕ)2 − λσ cos ϕ

2 + 1

2γ σ2(cid:111)

.

sg leads back to Ssg, but the monomials (cid:82) ddxσϕ2n now are marginal in
Integrating out σ from e−S(cid:48)
two dimensions, the σ2 is IR irrelevant. However, the σ2 must be kept to be able to integrate over
the auxiliary ﬁeld σ. Calculations with action S(cid:48)
sg are not simpler than calculations with Ssg. But
the dimensional analysis is standard, and the ﬁrst monomials of S(cid:48)
sg as usual deﬁne a hyperplane in
exponent space (ﬁg.(1)).

9.2 Kondo-eﬀect

A system can be inhomogeneous in space and scale invariant. An example is the Kondo eﬀect[4]
with action integral

SKondo =

(cid:90)

(cid:90)

dτ

(cid:90)

ddk

dΩ ¯ψ (∂τ + k) ψ +

(cid:90)

dτ ¯ϕ∂τ ϕ

(cid:90)

+

dτ

(cid:18)(cid:18)(cid:90)

(cid:90)

ddk

(cid:19)

dΩ ¯ψ

σ

(cid:18)(cid:90)

(cid:90)

ddk

(cid:19)(cid:19)

dΩψ

· ( ¯ϕσϕ)

The symbol τ denotes imaginary time, ψ describes band electrons, ϕ describes the defect electron
at the origin. The action integral is written in k-space because of the Fermi surface for the band

4The 4π-periodicity of S(cid:48)

sg in ϕ is reminiscent of fermions and bosonization, and in fact Ssg can be shown to be

equivalent to the massive Thirring model.[3]

7

Name
Directed percolation
Dynamical percolation
Model A of critical dynamics
Model J of critical dynamics
Gauge ﬁeld theory
Fermi theory of weak interactions
Fermi liquid

Critical dimension
4
6
4
6
4
2
1

Signature
(1, 2; 2, 2)
(1, 2; 2, 2, 4, 4)
(1, 2; 1, 3)
(1, 4; 2, 4)
(2; 2, 3, 3)
(2; 1, 1)
(2, 2; 1, 1)

Table 1: Signatures of some renormalizable ﬁeld theories. “Critical dimension” here is the dimension
of the d-dimensional space, not the some of all coordinate (and time) dimensions.

electrons. Components Ω of wavevectors parallel to the Fermi surface take not part in the scaling
and only label the degrees of freedom (there is no distinguished Ω0 around which to scale Ω). The
symbol k denotes the wavevector component perpendicular to the Fermi surface, and only d = 1 has
physical meaning. This is consistent with the critical dimension dc = 1 (this already indicates that
the Kondo eﬀect occurs in any space dimension5 dspace = dc + dim (Ω)). The nonlinear monomial
is the interaction energy between band electrons and the defect electron, σ denotes the Pauli spin
matrices (note that (cid:82) ddk (cid:82) dΩψ (k) = ψ (x = 0)).

The action integral SKondo looks complicated, but the scaling analysis is pure formalism and
accomplished in Kanon on the ﬂy. The Pauli matrices σ and (cid:82) dΩ are dimensionless and take not
part in the scaling. As usual, once it is clear that SKondo is scale invariant, the way is open for a
renormalization group calculation.

The ﬁelds ϕ und ¯ϕ actually only depend on imaginary time τ and thus are not ﬁelds in the usual
sense. To remedy this one could write ϕ = Φ (x = 0) = (cid:82) ddk (cid:82) dΩΦ (k) with a ﬁeld Φ. The scaling
analysis also is standard with this notation. However, the two notations lead to hyperplanes with
diﬀerent normal vectors, i.e. the signatures diﬀer. An advantage of the formulation with the Φ-ﬁeld
might be, that insisting on using ﬁelds in the usual sense leads to a unique normal vector (signature)
for the model.

10 Classiﬁcation of renormalizible ﬁeld theories, signature

As illustrated in ﬁg.(1), renormalizable ﬁeld theories are associated with hyperplanes in exponent
space. Monomials on the hyperplane are marginal, monomials on one side are relevant, monomials
on the other side are irrelevant.

Selecting diﬀerent M monomials from a set of monomials often selects diﬀerent hyperplanes, and

makes diﬀerent monomials relevant, marginal or irrelevant.

This suggests to use the hyperplanes as signature for a critical model. A hyperplane contains at
least model order linearly independent monomials. It can contain more monomials, all marginal and
possibly important for the critical point. The correspondence is not unique, diﬀerent universality
classes can have the same hyperplane. For instance, the naive scaling analysis is the same for scalar
und vector valued order parameters.

The signature consists of the critical dimension and the normal vector N = ([km] ; [ϕm]) of the
hyperplane. The naive scaling dimensions [km] and [ϕm (x)] can be arranged in increasing order,
except for the ﬁrst element [k1] = 1 for the d-dimensional space, which plays a special role. The
table shows some examples

The vector element N1 = 1 conveys no information, and it is possible to multiply N with the
smallest integer converting all Nm to integers. For action integrals formulated in wavevector space

5Except for Luttinger liquids with dspace = 1.

8

(instead of real space) the ﬁelds are functions of wavevectors, and Kanon calculates the dimensions
of these ﬁelds. But to have an invariant signature one should use the dimensions of real space ﬁelds
in the signature, which diﬀer by the dimensions of the Fourier transform integrals. It also suggests
itself to list coordinate dimensions (before the semicolon) and ﬁeld dimensions (after the semicolon)
in increasing order, except for the d-dimensional coordinate, which is the ﬁrst element.

An interesting question is: how many renormalizable ﬁeld theories are there for a given number of
coordinates and a given number of ﬁelds? Exponents of ﬁelds in an action integral must be positive
(the only known exception is conformal quantum mechanics).

Exponents of coordinates can be negative because of integrals (and sporadically inverse Laplace

operators), but normally there is only one integral per coordinate (in real space).

If only a limited number of ﬁeld factors and a limited number of derivates is allowed in each
monomial, then the renormalizable ﬁeld theories correspond to hyperplanes deﬁned by M monomials
(points with integer coordinates) in some cuboid (or simplex) in M -dimensional exponent space
(ﬁg.(1)).

To ﬁnd the hyperplanes deﬁned by M points with integer coordinates in this cuboid and other

points on each hyperplane is a diophantine problem.

This problem can be attacked somewhat brute-force with the help of a computer, but not all
hyperplanes lead to action integrals of the usual type. For instance, a hyperplane must contain
monomials harmonic in the ﬁelds deﬁning propagators, and more heuristic rules can be imposed.
The mapping from a hyperplane to a renormalizable ﬁeld theory is not unique, but it often is not
diﬃcult to write down plausible candidates. It would be of interest to classify all scale invariant
action integrals for a given number of coordinates and ﬁelds and a given cuboid of exponents.

10.1 Additional marginal monomials

A related but simpler diophantine problem is to ﬁnd all marginal monomials (in some range) of a
given scale invariant action integral. This amounts to solving a linear diophantine equation. The
structure of the solutions of linear diophantine equations is known[5]. There are M − 1 linearly
independent base vectors ei, and the lattice m0 + (cid:80) niei with a marginal monomial m0 and integers
ni represents all marginal monomials.

Numerically, a simple brute-force search for additional marginal monomials in a cuboid of expo-
nents turns out to be more eﬃcient. The advantage of this approach is that the iterations run over
exponents and that the iteration range has direct meaning. Kanon oﬀers both algorithms.

In any case, one should check additional marginal monomials carefully.

If such a monomial
is generated in perturbation theory, then it must be taken into acount in renormalization group
calculations.[6]

Many other marginal monomials can be ruled out by physical or formal reasons. If this is not the
case, then adding the monomial to the action integral may convert it to another universality class.
The question then is, whether the model with the additional interaction has a physical meaning.

11 Summary

The software tool Kanon oﬀers a uniﬁed view on all types of renormalizable ﬁeld theories. Action
integrals can be deﬁned interactively by drag and drop, and if an action integral turns out to be scale
invariant, then what remains to be done is the renormalization group calculation.

When using the tool it should become clear, that a renormalizable ﬁeld theory is associated with a
hyperplane in an exponent space, determined by model order monomials. It should become clear that
dimensionless ﬁelds are problematic, and it should become clear that it is to some degree arbitrary
which monomials are kept ﬁxed in the renormalization procedure, and which ones need a coupling
constant. There often are additional marginal monomials, which can be determined in Kanon on

9

the ﬂy. Most of them can be ruled out by formal or physical reasons, but the other ones should be
examined carefully.

The dimensional analysis of an action integral often is presented in the literature in concrete cases
quite ad hoc with arguments of diﬀerent quality. Scale invariance, however, is a precise mathematical
concept, and having a tool for this purpose is useful for practical and didactic reasons.

References

[1] R. Dengler, https://sourceforge.net/projects/kanon/, (2022).

[2] M. D. Scadron, Advanced Quantum Theory, Springer, (1979).

[3] J. Zinn-Justin, Quantum Field Theory and Critical Phenomena, Oxford science publications,

(1997).

[4] J. Kondo, Resistance minimum in dilute magnetic alloys, Progress of theoretical physics, 32(1),

37-49, (1964).

[5] See, for instance: P. Bundschuh, Einführung in die Zahlentheorie, Springer (1991).

[6] R. Dengler, Renormalization group calculation of the critical exponents for the Lifshitz tricritical

point, Phys. Lett. 108A, 296(1985).

10

