A ﬁrst-principles calculation of electron-phonon interactions for the C2CN and VNNB
defects in hexagonal boron nitride

K. Sharman,1, 2, 3 O. Golami,1, 2, 3 S. C. Wein,1, 2, 3, 4 H.
Zadeh-Haghighi,1, 2, 3 C. G. Rocha,1, 2, 3 A. Kubanek,5, 6 and C. Simon1, 2, 3
1Institute for Quantum Science and Technology, 2500 University Drive NW, Calgary, Alberta T2N 1N4, Canada
2Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Calgary,
2500 University Drive NW, Calgary, Alberta T2N 1N4, Canada
3Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of Calgary,
3330 Hospital Drive NW, Calgary, Alberta T2N 4N1, Canada
4Quandela SAS, 10 Boulevard Thomas Gobert, 91120, Palaiseau, France
5Institute for Quantum Optics, Ulm University, D-89081 Ulm, Germany
6Center for Integrated Quantum Science and Technology (IQst), Ulm University, D-89081 Ulm, Germany

Quantum emitters in two-dimensional hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) have generated signiﬁcant
interest due to observations of ultra-bright emission made at room temperature. The expectation
that solid-state emitters exhibit broad zero-phonon lines at elevated temperatures has been put in
question by recent observations of Fourier transform (FT) limited photons emitted from h-BN ﬂakes
at room temperature. The mechanism responsible for the narrow lines has been suggested to be
a mechanical decoupling from in-plane phonons due to an out-of-plane distortion of the emitter’s
orbitals. All decoupled emitters produce photons that are directed in-plane, suggesting that the
dipoles are oriented perpendicular to the h-BN plane. Motivated by the promise of an eﬃcient
and scalable source of indistinguishable photons that can operate at room temperature, we have
developed an approach using density functional theory (DFT) to determine the electron-phonon
coupling for defects that have in- and out-of-plane transition dipole moments. Our DFT calculations
reveal that the C2CN defect has an in-plane transition dipole moment, and that of the VNNB defect
is perpendicular to the plane. We exploit the two-dimensional framework recently implemented in
QUANTUM ESPRESSO to determine both the phonon density of states and the electron-phonon matrix
elements associated with the h-BN defective structures. We ﬁnd no indication that an out-of-plane
transition dipole is suﬃcient to obtain FT-limited photons at room temperature. Our work also
provides direction to future DFT software developments and adds to the growing list of calculations
relevant to researchers in the ﬁeld of solid-state quantum information processing.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Single-photon sources (SPSs) are essential components
of many quantum technologies,
including linear opti-
cal quantum computing [1, 2], quantum random num-
ber generation [3, 4], and quantum communication [5–7].
Atom-like solid-state emitters are regarded as promising
SPSs because they combine the excellent optical prop-
erties of atoms with the reproducible and scalable fab-
rication methods that are available to solid-state mate-
rials [8–11]. Among solid-state SPSs, emitters in two-
dimensional (2D) hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) [12–
14] have recently generated signiﬁcant interest due to ex-
perimental observations of ultra-bright emission at room
temperature [15–22].

Many quantum technologies which incorporate SPSs
make use of single- or two-photon interference where in-
distinguishable photons are required. A signiﬁcant dis-
advantage associated with solid-state systems such as h-
BN is that phonon-induced dephasing typically results in
homogeneous spectral broadening of the emission lines,
which in turn, reduces the degree of photon indistin-
guishability [23].

When the excited electronic state of an optical transi-
tion is subject to negligible broadening mechanisms, the
zero-phonon line (ZPL) is said to be Fourier transform

(FT) limited, meaning the spectral width is given by the
radiative decay rate [24–27]. SPSs which produce FT-
limited photons are desired because they have the po-
tential to serve as eﬃcient sources of indistinguishable
photons. Unfortunately, solid-state SPSs are typically
required to operate at cryogenic temperatures to produce
FT-limited emission [27–29]. The development of solid-
state indistinguishable SPSs which can operate at room
temperature would represent a major advancement as it
would drastically reduce the diﬃculties associated with
cryogenic cooling.

Recently, Dietrich et al. [30] observed FT-limited pho-
tons from emitters in h-BN at room temperature. While
the atomic structure of the emitter (or emitters) respon-
sible is not yet known, it has been suggested that the
underlying mechanism responsible for the narrow lines is
an out-of-plane distortion of the emitter’s orbitals and/or
the transition dipole moment [31]. Support for this claim
is given by analysis of the measured photoluminescence
spectrum which indicates that the emitter weakly couples
to in-plane phonon modes. Additionally, the ability to
observe emission from a mechanically decoupled emitter
requires that the emitter is on a tilted plane, suggesting
that the transition dipole is perpendicular to the plane.

Motivated by the desire to develop solid-state SPSs
which are capable of eﬃciently providing indistinguish-

2
2
0
2

l
u
J

8
2

]
i
c
s
-
l
r
t

m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[

1
v
1
1
4
4
1
.

7
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
able photons at room temperature, we have developed an
approach using ﬁrst-principle calculations to gain insight
into the temperature-dependent electron-phonon inter-
actions that lead to a broadening of the ZPL emission.
Density functional theory (DFT) calculations have been
extensively used to predict the electronic, vibrational,
and optical properties of numerous solid-state emitters
[32–39]. A computational methodology for determining
the electron-phonon coupling associated with an optical
transition has been developed by Alkauskas et al. [40, 41].
The method was applied to the negatively charged ni-
trogen vacancy (NV−) center in diamond, resulting in
calculated luminescence and absorption lineshapes that
are in excellent agreement with experimental data. Un-
fortunately, the model does not predict the homogeneous
broadening of the ZPL, and the width is selected to match
experimental observations. The temperature dependence
of the ZPL width for the NV− center has, however, been
successfully described using a model that considers inter-
actions between the excited electronic states and acous-
tic phonons [42]. The key quantities required to calculate
the linewidth include the phonon density of states (DOS)
and the electron-phonon matrix elements. The analysis
presented in Ref. [42] was based on a combination of the-
ory and experiment. We perform a related investigation
for defects in 2D h-BN without the need for experimental
data, which is not yet available for the defects analyzed
in this work.

To investigate the relationship between the transi-
tion dipole direction and the electron-phonon interaction
strengths, we have studied two defects in 2D h-BN. Our
DFT calculations reveal that the C2CN and VNNB de-
fects have transition dipoles that are in- and out-of-plane,
respectively. We use density functional perturbation the-
ory (DFPT), the goal of which is to compute derivatives
of the DFT electronic energy with respect to diﬀerent
perturbations, to calculate and compare both the phonon
DOS and the electron-phonon matrix elements of these
two defects. Our ﬁndings provide no indication that an
out-of-plane transition dipole moment will result in the
low electron-phonon coupling required to produce FT-
limited lines at room temperature.

The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we dis-
cuss the electron-phonon interactions which are respon-
sible for spectral broadening. In Sec. III, we provide the
details of our calculations and present the results. In Sec.
IV, we discuss the limitations associated with our anal-
ysis, along with possible extensions to our investigation.
We conclude and provide an outlook in Sec. V.

2

nian which describes the electron-phonon coupling within
DFT is obtained by expanding the Kohn-Sham eﬀective
potential in terms of nuclear displacements from their
equilibrium positions, and is given by [44]

ˆHep =

1
(cid:112)Np

(cid:34)

+

1
Np

k,q,q(cid:48)
mnνν(cid:48)

(cid:88)

k,q
mnν

(cid:88)

mnν(k, q)ˆc†
g(1)

m,k+qˆcn,k(ˆaν,q + ˆa†

ν,−q)

g(2)
mnνν(cid:48)(k, q, q(cid:48))ˆc†

m,k+q+q(cid:48) ˆcn,k

× (ˆaν,q + ˆa†

ν,−q)(ˆaν(cid:48),q(cid:48) + ˆa†

(cid:35)
ν(cid:48),−q(cid:48))

.

(1)

n,k and ˆcn,k (ˆa†

The ﬁrst line of Eqn. 1 describes, to ﬁrst order in nu-
clear displacements, the linear coupling between an elec-
tron in band n (m) with wave vector k (k+q), and a
phonon in branch ν with wave vector q (−q). The elec-
tronic (phononic) creation and annihilation operators are
given by ˆc†
ν,q and ˆaν,q), respectively. The
phonon wave vectors deﬁne a uniform grid of Np points
in one unit cell of the reciprocal lattice. The second and
third lines of Eqn. 1 describe the additional quadratic
electron-phonon coupling that arises when expansion of
the Kohn-Sham potential includes second-order nuclear
displacements. The quadratic terms describe the inter-
actions between an electron and two phonons, where one
phonon is in mode ν with wave vector q and the other
is in mode ν(cid:48) with wave vector q(cid:48). The matrix elements
mnν(k, q) and g(2)
g(1)
mnνν(cid:48)(k, q, q(cid:48)) quantify the magnitude
of the linear and quadratic electron-phonon couplings,
respectively.
Previous

the
temperature-dependent broadening of ZPL emission
from solid-state defects have identiﬁed that two-phonon
processes dominate at higher temperatures, but the
speciﬁc transitions involved vary from defect to defect.
In the negatively charged silicon-vacancy center in
diamond, for example, linear interactions with phonons
result in second-order elastic scattering processes that
dominate the ZPL broadening at temperatures above
In the NV− center, on the other hand,
70 K [49].
linear interactions with phonons result in second-order
inelastic Raman-type scattering processes, and quadratic
interactions with phonons result in ﬁrst-order elastic
scattering mechanisms [42]. Both types of processes
must be considered when determining the ZPL width at
room temperature.

investigations

45–48]

into

[42,

II. THEORY

A. Electron-phonon interactions

In Kohn-Sham DFT formalism [43], an interacting
many-particle system is described in terms of an ef-
fective non-interacting system. The standard Hamilto-

While the exact nature of the electron-phonon interac-
tions depends on the electronic structure of the defect, all
these processes share the fact that the associated inter-
action rates, which are calculated using Fermi’s Golden
Rule [50], are functions of both the phonon DOS and the
electron-phonon matrix elements. Thus, calculating the
electron-phonon matrix elements and the phonon DOS
provides valuable insight into the processes responsible

for the ZPL broadening.

The FT-limited emission reported in Ref.

[30] is the
result of either very small matrix elements or vanishing
phonon DOS, or both. If defects with out-of-plane transi-
tion dipole moments do indeed result in FT-limited emis-
sion at elevated temperatures, then the corresponding
electron-phonon coupling should be noticeably smaller
than that of a defect center which possess an in-plane
transition dipole.

To simplify the analysis, we do not consider electron-
phonon interactions which result in transitions between
electronic bands. We are interested in a system that
displays no ZPL broadening when the temperature in-
creases, requiring that both intraband and interband
scattering processes are negligible. Additionally, phonon-
assisted transitions between excited states are expected
to be negligible for both defects, since the excited states
are non-degenerate and well-separated in energy [34, 51].
A good starting-point is therefore to determine the im-
pact that the transition dipole direction has on only the
intraband scattering rates.

B. Phonon density of states

In the Born-Oppenheimer approximation, the nuclei
move in a potential energy (U ) given by the total en-
ergy of the electronic system calculated at ﬁxed nuclei.
Dynamical properties of solid-state structures can be de-
rived by expanding U with respect to small displace-
ments, ul
κα, about the equilibrium conﬁguration of the
nuclei, where α are the cartesian indices of nucleus κ in
unit cell l. In the harmonic approximation, the expansion
is given by

U = U0 +

1
2

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

lκα

l(cid:48)κ(cid:48)α(cid:48)

∂2U
κα∂ul(cid:48)

∂ul

κ(cid:48)α(cid:48)

καul(cid:48)
ul

κ(cid:48)α(cid:48).

(2)

Here, U0 is the total energy when the nuclei are in their
equilibrium positions, and ∂2U/∂ul
κα,κ(cid:48)α(cid:48) is
the matrix of interatomic force constants (IFCs) [52, 53].
The classical motion of the nuclei is determined by New-
tonian physics, which amounts to solving the generalized
eigenvalue problem [54],

κ(cid:48)α(cid:48) = C l,l(cid:48)

κα∂ul(cid:48)

Dκα,κ(cid:48)α(cid:48)(q)eκ(cid:48)α(cid:48),ν(q) = ω2

ν,qeκα,ν(q).

(3)

(cid:88)

κ(cid:48)α(cid:48)

The dynamical matrix Dκα,κ(cid:48)α(cid:48)(q) is deﬁned as the
Fourier transform of the IFC matrix

Dκα,κ(cid:48)α(cid:48)(q) =

√

1
mκmκ(cid:48)

(cid:88)

l(cid:48)

C 0,l(cid:48)

κα,κ(cid:48)α(cid:48)eiq·Rl ,

(4)

where mκ denotes the mass of nuclei κ, Rl is the position
vector of unit cell l, and q is the phonon wave vector. The
solutions to Eqn. 3 are the polarization vectors eκα,ν(q)
and frequencies ων,q corresponding to the phonon mode
ν [44, 55].

3

Calculation of the phonon frequencies given by Eqn.
3 on a grid of q-vectors allows for the determination of
the phonon DOS, ρ(ω), which is deﬁned as the number
of phonon modes per unit of frequency. The total num-
ber of modes with frequencies between ω and ω + dω
is given by ρ(ω)dω. In a system of N nuclei, there are
3N modes, hence, (cid:82) ρ(ω)dω = 3N . After calculating the
phonon modes associated with a given system it is then
possible to determine the corresponding electron-phonon
coupling.

C. Electron-phonon matrix elements

The linear electron-phonon matrix elements are com-

puted in DFPT as [56]

g(1)
mnν(k, q) =

(cid:115) (cid:126)

2m0ων,q

(cid:104)ψm,k+q|∂νqV |ψn,k(cid:105) ,

(5)

which quantiﬁes the coupling between the Kohn-Sham
electronic states ψn,k and ψm,k+q. Here, ∂ν,qV is the
change in the Kohn-Sham potential associated with a
phonon of wave vector q, branch index ν with frequency
ων,q, (cid:126) is the reduced Planck’s constant, and m0 is the
mass of the nuclei in the unit cell [57].

The DFPT software we use in Sec. III has not yet im-
plemented the ability to calculate the quadratic electron-
phonon matrix elements. A widely accepted approxima-
tion [42, 45, 46] is that the quadratic elements are pro-
portional to products of the linear elements, i.e, g(2)
mnνν(cid:48) ∝
mnν × g(1)
mnν × g(1)
g(1)
mnν(cid:48) and
discuss in Sec. III C the impact that this approximation
has on our results.

mnν(cid:48). We assume g(2)

mnνν(cid:48) = g(1)

III. DFT AND DFPT CALCULATIONS

To shed light on the relationship between electron-
phonon coupling and the transition dipole direction asso-
ciated with solid-state defects in 2D materials, we inves-
tigate two defects induced on 2D h-BN structures: VNNB
[34, 58] and C2CN [51] which are depicted in Fig. 1. The
primary reason for selecting these defects is that our cal-
culations reveal VNNB and C2CN have out-of-plane and
in-plane transition dipoles, respectively. Details of both
the relaxation and the transition dipole calculations are
provided in Sec. III A.

Additional motivation for comparing these two defects
can be seen in the corresponding relaxed atomic conﬁg-
urations as shown in Fig. 1. We ﬁnd that C2CN lies in-
plane whereas the central nitrogen in VNNB is displaced
0.6 ˚A out-of-plane. The total energy of the VNNB de-
fect with the displaced nitrogen was found to be 37 meV
lower than the case where the defect nuclei were all in-
plane (see Sec. III A for details of the relaxation calcu-
lations). This is consistent with previous ﬁndings where

4

FIG. 1. Relaxed atomic conﬁgurations of defects on 2D h-
BN structures. The C2CN defect consists of adding 3 carbon
atoms onto the h-BN structure as indicated on the left panel.
The carbon-carbon, carbon-nitrogen, and carbon-boron bond
lengths were found to be 1.41 ˚A, 1.42 ˚A, and 1.54 ˚A, respec-
tively. The VNNB defect consists of making a vacancy in the
h-BN structure and adding a substitutional nitrogen impurity
as indicated on the right panel. The 2D h-BN layer is taken
to lie on the x-y plane. Out-of-plane distortions correspond
to displacements in the z-direction.

defect centers belonging to the VNXB family have an out-
of-plane displacement of the X impurity atom [58–60].
VNXB defects possess a double-well potential for the out-
of-plane displacement of the defect. The two wells cor-
respond to displacements of the X impurity atom above
and below the plane, and the in-plane position represents
a local maximum.

The double-well potential has several characteristics
that are consistent with the ﬁndings of Refs.
[30] and
[31]. The ﬁrst is that the strong localization of the defect
orbitals around the impurity results in displacement of
both the nucleus and the orbitals, possibly leading to a
reduction of the coupling strength between the defect and
in-plane phonon modes. The second characteristic is that
the double-well potential provides an explanation as to
why the emission polarization is diﬀerent for resonant ex-
citation and far oﬀ-resonance excitation. If the reﬂection
symmetry of the defect is removed by interactions with
a nearby surface or defect, then one of the wells will be
lower in energy and the impurity atom will shift farther
away from the plane. This can result in two sets of tran-
sitions which, in general, have diﬀerent transition dipoles
and polarization. It is possible that oﬀ-resonant excita-
tions followed by nonradiative decay to one of the excited
states will result in an optical transition with polariza-
tion which diﬀers from that of the resonant transition.
A defect with a double-well potential is consistent with
the observations reported in Refs.
[19] and [30], both
of which suggest the presence of a second excited state
which can be excited indirectly, and has a polarization
that diﬀers from that of the resonant transition. Finally,
a characteristic of a double-well potential is that vari-
ous spectral properties, such as spectral diﬀusion, could
depend on the excitation process. An excitation via a
diﬀerent excited state could be an explanation for dif-

FIG. 2. Single-particle defect levels and occupations corre-
sponding to the ground and ﬁrst excited electronic states of
the (a) C2CN and (b) VNNB defects at the Γ point. The
molecular orbitals are labeled according to their group theory
symmetry-adapted orbitals [34, 51].

ferent susceptibility to spectral diﬀusion depending on
resonant or oﬀ-resonant excitation, which is consistent
with experimental observations [30, 31].

Thus, studying the VNNB defect allows for a simulta-
neous investigation of the electron-phonon coupling asso-
ciated with the case of a perpendicular transition dipole
moment, and the case where the central defect nucleus
and the defect orbitals are displaced from the h-BN layer.
The electronic energy levels of the ground and ﬁrst ex-
cited states for C2CN and VNNB are illustrated in Fig. 2.
The electronic structures of these defects have some sim-
ilarities. First, there are three molecular orbitals which
are located within the band gap. Second, in the ground
state conﬁguration the lowest-lying level is fully occupied,
the middle level is half-occupied, and the upper level is
empty. Third, upon excitation, the spin-down electron in
the lower level is promoted to the middle level. For both
defects, we are interested in emission corresponding to
the electronic transition of the spin-down electron from
the middle to the lower level. Detailed investigations into
the electronic structure of VNNB and C2CN can be found
in Refs. [34] and Ref. [51], respectively.

The QUANTUM ESPRESSO [61–63] software package is
a well-established computational toolkit for predicting
electronic and phonon properties of defects in solid-state
systems. The following DFT and DFPT [56, 57, 64]
calculations and post-processing were performed using
QUANTUM ESPRESSO. Various assumptions and simpliﬁca-
tions made in our analysis are speciﬁc to the current ca-
pabilities oﬀered by this package.

A. Electronic structure calculations

Our DFT calculations in QUANTUM ESPRESSO were per-
formed using the generalized gradient approximation
(GGA), with the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) func-
tional [65] for the electron exchange and correlation po-
tentials. We used a plane-wave basis set with a wave
function kinetic energy cutoﬀ of 60 Ry and projector
augmented wave (PAW) pseudopotentials [66]. The to-

tal energy was found to converge at approximately 40
Ry, however, the larger cutoﬀ was selected to ensure the
accurate calculation of the phonon modes.

Our super-cells consisted of 50 atoms corresponding to
5 × 5 unit cells of mono-layer h-BN. The structures were
relaxed until the force on each atom was less than 1×10−6
Ry/au, and we used a convergence threshold for the self
consistency calculations of 1 × 10−12 Ry. Relaxation was
performed by allowing the in-plane lattice vectors to re-
lax, and the out-of-plane lattice vector was held ﬁxed to
impose a vacuum spacing of 15 ˚A. The electronic and
phonon calculations were run within the 2D framework
oﬀered by QUANTUM ESPRESSO, where the Coulomb inter-
action is truncated in the z-direction [67]. Other works
that also inspired the settings of our DFT calculations
and serve as important references for the calibration of
the pristine h-BN calculations and the defect study cases
are Refs. [68–75].

The total energy converged with respect to the Bril-
louin zone sampling density, and the lower-limit neces-
sary to achieve convergence, a 2 × 2 × 1 k-grid, was
used. Both the super-cell size and the sampling density
are important factors which dictate the run-time asso-
ciated with the DFPT calculations.
In particular, the
matrix element calculations are computationally expen-
sive in terms of run-time. The use of larger super-cells
and/or more dense k-grids resulted in calculations that
were infeasible. Thus, the ﬁrst step was to verify that
our 50-atom super-cell calculations managed to capture
several key properties of the defect that are of interest in
our study.

In Fig. 3, we plot the electronic band structure and
wave functions obtained for both defects. Our calcula-
tions yield three defect states within the energy gap as ex-
pected, and inspection of the wave functions reveal that
the relative ordering of the states is the same as obtained
in Refs. [34] and [51]. Additionally, the defect states are
relatively ﬂat, that is, the energy does not vary signif-
icantly along the Brillouin zone path. We found that
smaller super-cell models resulted in dispersive bands
across the Brillouin zone, which is due to defect-defect
interactions resulting from the periodic replicas of the
super-cell.

Given that the main features of the electronic band
structure and defect wave functions associated with the
50-atom cell are consistent with the ﬁndings of Refs. [34]
and [51], we conclude that the strong localization of the
defect wave functions around the defect nuclei makes it
possible to provide a reasonable description of the elec-
tronic structure using a medium size super-cell.

The two defects were initially of interest to us be-
cause inspection of the molecular orbitals, following the
method presented in Ref. [76], indicated that the transi-
tion dipole moment associated with the ﬁrst excited state
to ground state transition of C2CN would lie in the h-BN
plane (taken to be the x-y plane), and that of VNNB
would have transition dipole perpendicular to the plane.
Inspection of Fig. 3 reveals this to be the case since the

5

FIG. 3. Electronic band structure and molecular orbitals for
the (a) C2CN and (b) VNNB defect structures. Relatively low
dispersion of the defect states was obtained for a 50 atom
super-cell, corresponding to 5 × 5 unit cells of h-BN.

molecular orbitals of C2CN are both antisymmetric with
respect to in-plane mirror symmetry, resulting in a tran-
sition dipole with a z-component equal to zero. On the
other hand, the b2 and a1 orbitals of VNNB are antisym-
metric and symmetric, respectively, which indicates that
the z-component of the transition dipole can be nonzero.
To quantify the direction of the transition dipoles,
the WFCK2R.X module in QUANTUM ESPRESSO [61--63]
was used to produce the real-space wave functions, from
which the transition dipole moments were directly com-
puted according to

µ = (cid:104)ψf |er|ψi(cid:105) ,

(6)

where ψi and ψf are the initial and ﬁnal wave functions,
e is the elementary charge, and r is the real-space unit
vector. The results of the calculations are presented in
Table I.

TABLE I. Calculated transition dipole moment between the
ground and ﬁrst excited states of the C2CN and VNNB defects.

Defect

µ

µ [e˚A] (cid:112)µ2

x + µ2

y/µ

µz/µ

C2CN (cid:104)b2|er|a2(cid:105)
VNNB (cid:104)a1|er|b2(cid:105)

0.93
2.5 × 10−3

1.0
2.4 × 10−6

1.3 × 10−8
1.0

The transition dipole associated with VNNB is signiﬁ-
cantly smaller than that of C2CN. The reason for this is

that the C2CN charge density in both the ground and ex-
cited states is much more localized to the carbon atoms,
as compared to the ground state charge density of VNNB
which is spread around the vacancy.

The last column in Table I presents the ratio of the
magnitude of the out-of-plane component of the tran-
sition dipole to the total magnitude. Consistent with
the graphical estimation, the transition dipole associated
with the ZPL transition of C2CN is found to lie in-plane,
and that of VNNB is perpendicular to the plane.

B. Phonon DOS

The model which successfully describes the ZPL broad-
ening of the NV− center [42] considers electron-phonon
interaction rates occurring in the excited electronic state.
When the electron associated with a transition is pro-
moted to a higher-energy orbital, the nuclear conﬁgu-
ration shifts in response to the change in electron den-
sity. While it is possible to perform DFT calcula-
tions in the excited-state nuclear conﬁguration using the
∆SCF method [77], it is not yet possible using QUANTUM
ESPRESSO to perform the DFPT calculations outside of
the ground-state nuclear conﬁguration. As such, we as-
sume that the calculations performed in the ground-state
nuclear conﬁguration of both the phonon DOS and the
electron-phonon couplings in the excited electronic state,
provide an adequate description of the corresponding
quantities in the excited nuclear conﬁguration. This as-
sumption represents a notable limitation in our analysis,
and further discussion is provided in Sec. IV.

The phonon DOS was computed following several
steps. First, the PH.X module in QUANTUM ESPRESSO [61–
63] was used to perform the DFPT calculations and com-
pute the dynamical matrices using a 2×2×1 q-grid, which
is commensurate with the electronic grid as required by
the matrix element calculations. The convergence thresh-
old was set to 1 × 10−16 Ry.

Calculation of the dynamical matrices was split-up
into four separate calculations using the same general
methodology as outlined in Ref. [78]. While the 50-atom
super-cell is suﬃciently small to run the DFPT calcula-
tion as a single job over several days, depending on the
computational resources available, it may be useful to
manage this calculation in parts, i.e., by dividing the cal-
culation into many sub-tasks to eﬃciently schedule and
process the results.

Next, the real-space IFCs were calculated from the
dynamical matrices using the QUANTUM ESPRESSO Q2R.X
module [61–63] with the simple acoustic-sum-rule im-
posed. Finally, the QUANTUM ESPRESSO MATDYN.X mod-
ule [61–63] was used to calculate phonon frequencies at
generic q-points, via Fourier transform of the IFCs as de-
scribed by Eqn. 4. The phonon DOS was calculated on
a dense 50 × 50 × 1 grid of q-points. Gaussian smoothing
was then applied using a Full Width at Half Maximum of
3 meV (0.725 THz). An additional observation made in

6

Ref. [31] which we have not yet discussed is that all emit-
ters which produce narrow lines have one-phonon bands
with a gap of approximately 2 THz in the low-energy
regime, indicating a reduction of either the phonon den-
sity or the electron-phonon coupling associated with low-
energy acoustic phonons. The Gaussian smoothing was
chosen such that the resolution is high enough to enable
a sampling rate capable of resolving low-energy gaps of
approximately 2 THz. The resulting phonon DOS for
both defects are shown in Fig. 4.

Comparing the DOS of both defects, there are no fea-
tures which immediately suggest that the phonon den-
sities are suppressed in VNNB. According to the the-
ory of Ref.
[42], contributions from low-energy acoustic
phonon modes have the dominant impact on ZPL broad-
ening. The peak at approximately 40 meV is likely to
be the acoustic mode cutoﬀ energy (the highest possible
energy of the acoustic modes). Both defects have non-
negligible contributions to the DOS from phonons with
energies below the cutoﬀ, indicating that if the direction
of the transition dipole does have an signiﬁcant eﬀect on
the electron-phonon interaction rates, then such a mech-
anism must manifest itself in the matrix elements.

C. Matrix elements

Calculation of the electron-phonon matrix elements
from ﬁrst-principles is challenging because of the neces-
sity of sampling the Brillouin zone using a very dense grid
of q-points. The EPW software package [56, 57, 64], which
is fully integrated in and distributed with the QUANTUM
ESPRESSO package, provides the capability to calculate
the linear matrix element coupling terms in Eqn. 1. The
recent release of EPW v5.4 (7/2021) has implemented the
2D framework [67] used in the electronic and phonon cal-
culations, making it possible to calculate the coupling in
2D materials.

EPW exploits the real-space localization of Wannier
functions to generate large numbers of electron–phonon
matrix elements through a generalized Fourier interpola-
tion. The matrix elements are computed on a coarse grid
of electron and phonon wave vectors in the Bloch repre-
sentation. They are then transformed from the Bloch
representation to the maximally localized Wannier func-
tions representation. Finally, they are Fourier trans-
formed back to the Bloch representation on arbitrarily
dense grids of electron and phonon wave vectors.

After performing the electronic and DFPT calculations
III A and III B, the matrix elements
described in Sec.
were computed on a dense grid of 100 × 100 × 1 q-points
at the Γ k-point. The resulting matrix elements were
ordered according to phonon energy, partitioned into 1
meV bins, and the average within each bin was computed.
As previously discussed, our focus is on the coupling
associated with intraband electronic transitions in the
excited electronic state. For C2CN the excited electronic
band is a2, and for VNNB it is the b2 band (see Fig.

7

FIG. 4. Phonon DOS of the (a) C2CN and (c) VNNB defects in mono-layer h-BN. Average electron-phonon coupling strengths
as a function of energy associated with intraband scattering processes which occur in the excited electronic state of the (b)
C2CN and (d) VNNB defect structures.

3). The calculated average electron-phonon coupling
strengths for the intraband processes were plotted as a
function of energy and the results of both defect struc-
tures are shown in Fig. 4. While the low-energy regime
is of primary interest to our analysis, our calculations are
not able to resolve the ﬁne features associated with the
acoustic phonons. We performed the same calculations
for smaller super-cells and there does not appear to be
convergence of the features in the low-energy regime. As
such, we have plotted the entire range of phonon energies
rather than a magniﬁed view of the acoustic regime.

The ﬁrst-order elastic scattering processes which in-
volve the absorption of one phonon and the emission of
another phonon with the same energy occur at rates that
depend on the quadratic matrix elements. As mentioned
in Sec. II C, we approximate the quadratic elements as
products of the linear elements. For intraband mecha-
nisms, the quantity of interest is then the square of the
linear elements, meaning it is suﬃcient to compare the
magnitudes of the linear elements of the two defects.

As with the case of the phonon DOS, there are obvi-
ous diﬀerences between the results of C2CN and VNNB,
however, there is no clear reduction in the strength of
the electron-phonon coupling in the low energy acous-
In fact, the matrix elements associ-
tic mode regime.

ated with the perpendicular transition dipole are slightly
larger than the case of the parallel dipole in the acoustic
regime. The matrix elements were calculated at several
k-points in addition to the Γ point and the correspond-
ing results show negligible diﬀerences when compared to
Fig. 4.

In order to exclude the theoretical possibility that the
coupling might be low for both defects, we compare the
matrix elements to those associated with the NV− cen-
ter in diamond (K. Sharman et al., in preparation). For
phonon energies less than 20 meV, the matrix elements
associated with the C2CN and VNNB defects are approx-
imately an order of magnitude greater than those asso-
ciated with the NV− center, and up to two orders of
magnitude greater at energies above 20 meV. Further,
our DFT calculations indicate that the DOS associated
with the NV− center is less concentrated at lower ener-
gies as compared to the two defects studied here. Since
the NV− center is known to have ZPL widths on the or-
der of 103 GHz at room temperature [42], the fact that
the defects studied here have larger matrix elements and
DOS at low phonon energies as compared to the NV−
center suggests that it would be unreasonable to expect
that either of these two defects would exhibit FT-limited
linewidths at room temperature.

The lack of a clear decoupling in either the DOS or the
matrix elements leads to the conclusion that the direction
of the transition dipole alone is not suﬃcient to result in
an appreciable lowering of the electron-phonon coupling
associated with defects in 2D materials. Similarly, the
out-of-plane displacement of the central nitrogen atom
in VNNB is not expected to be, by itself, the mechanism
responsible for the FT-limited lines reported in Refs. [30]
and [31]. Finally, we see no indication that the orienta-
tion of the transition dipole can explain the low-energy
gap in the one-phonon bands presented in Ref. [31].

It is worth mentioning that our analysis of the electron-
phonon coupling is not directly related to the phonon
sideband (PSB). The calculated couplings presented here
correspond to intraband electronic transitions. The
PSB on the other hand, involves interband transitions,
namely, transitions between the excited and ground
states. An interesting future project would be to use
related DFT calculations to calculate the PSB of a given
defect. We expect that for defects in h-BN, we should see
relatively large couplings between the excited and ground
states at approximately 160 meV since this feature ap-
pears in many of the experimental observations [36].

IV. DISCUSSION

The results presented in the preceding section are sub-
ject to a number of assumptions and limitations. We
suspect that the 50-atom super-cells used to model the
defects represent that the largest shortcoming associated
with our analysis. The electronic calculations revealed
that periodic replicas of the defect are suﬃciently far
from one another, however, we expect that the phonon
modes would be somewhat diﬀerent if the size of the
super-cell was increased.
In any case, our calculations
serve as a stepping stone to enable ﬁnite-size supercell
corrections to be implemented that can further improve
these ﬁndings quantitatively. Examples of such ﬁnite-
size correction methods that can be tested in electronic
structure calculations have been vastly published, e.g.,
[79–85]. Similar methods based on extrapolation schemes
could be used to analyze ﬁnite-size eﬀects in the phonon
modes.

The low sampling density of both the k- and q-points
is another signiﬁcant limitation in our analysis. Fourier
interpolation allows for calculation of both the phonon
DOS and the matrix elements on ﬁne grids, however, it
is possible that subtle details are not adequately captured
with the coarse grids. Along the same lines, our calcula-
tions are not able to resolve the mode-speciﬁc contribu-
tions to either the matrix elements or the phonon DOS.
It is possible that the in-plane acoustic mode is indeed
decoupled from the electronic state, but this information
is hidden in our analysis which considers the coupling of
all modes.

The electronic calculations did not utilize the Heyd-
Scuseria-Ernzerhof (HSE) hybrid functional [86], which

8

has been shown to provide an accurate estimate of the
band gap of h-BN, because the DFPT calculations im-
plemented in QUANTUM ESPRESSO do not support the use
of hybrid functionals. The impact of not using the HSE
functional can be seen in the underestimation of the en-
ergy spacing between defect states, and by extension, an
underestimation of the ZPL energy. The matrix element
calculations do not consider interband transitions, as dis-
cussed in Sec. II A, and therefore, underestimating the
energy spacing between electronic states is expected to
have negligible impact on our results.

Additionally, the electronic and phonon calculations
were performed in the ground-state nuclear conﬁgura-
tion. A more accurate description of the excited elec-
tronic state and the corresponding phonon modes could
be provided by using spin-polarized, constrained occu-
pancy calculations with the HSE functional. We sug-
gest that future software developments allow such cal-
culations to be run when determining both the phonon
DOS and the electron-phonon coupling. When available,
the electron-phonon coupling calculated in the excited
state framework can be compared to that of the ground
state framework presented here.

An extension of our analysis would be to calculate the
ZPL width as a function of temperature. This is an
interesting route, not only to identify the defects with
narrow lines at room temperature, but also to identify
solid-state defects in general which have unknown atomic
structures. As demonstrated by the NV− center and the
silicon-vacancy center in diamond, defects in the same
host material can have very diﬀerent electron-phonon in-
teractions, and the ZPL widths have diﬀerent tempera-
ture dependencies. Thus, the ability to calculate the ZPL
broadening would allow researchers to make additional
theoretical predictions which could then be compared to
experimental observations.

To calculate the ZPL width as a function of tem-
perature, one would need the ability to directly calcu-
late the quadratic electron-phonon matrix elements, de-
termine the acoustic mode cutoﬀ energies, as well as
the symmetry-speciﬁc mode contributions to the phonon
DOS [42]. Improvements made in these areas would rep-
resent a step closer towards a complete description of the
line broadening mechanisms from ﬁrst-principles.

V. CONCLUSION

The discovery of quantum emitters in layered h-BN
structures that are decoupled from in-plane phonons re-
veals that defects in solid-state systems have the poten-
tial to serve as indistinguishable SPSs which can oper-
ate at room temperature. The underlying mechanism
responsible for the decoupling remains a mystery, how-
ever, the leading hypothesis is that an out-of-plane dis-
tortion of the emitter’s orbitals leads to a reduction of the
electron-phonon coupling. Here, we have tested the the-
ory that the direction of the transition dipole moment

will directly impact the rate at which electron-phonon
interactions occur. Our DFT calculations show that the
transition dipole of C2CN is in-plane, and that of VNNB is
out-of-plane. DFPT calculations were used to investigate
and compare the phonon DOS and the electron-phonon
coupling associated with these two defects.

Our results show no clear indication that the electron-
phonon interactions are drastically diﬀerent for the two
defects, suggesting that an out-of-plane transition dipole
moment in 2D h-BN is not suﬃcient to suppress the
mechanisms responsible for temperature-dependent ZPL
broadening. Our ﬁndings also indicate that the out-
of-plane displacement of the nitrogen impurity atom in
VNNB does not lead to an obvious reduction in the
electron-phonon scattering processes.

We have discussed the various limitations associated
with our calculations, in hopes that future software de-
velopments can address these issues. Our detailed de-
scription of calculating the electron-phonon coupling will
be of interest in the ﬁeld of solid-state quantum informa-
tion processing, and adds to the ever-growing toolbox of
DFT methods available to researchers.

Since all mechanically decoupled emitters were found
in bulk-like h-BN, the multi-layer nature of the host ma-
terial could be an essential ingredient for the decoupling

9

mechanism [87]. The many layers in bulk-like h-BN could
provide a trap, for example, for molecules localized be-
tween the layers. In such a scenario, the acoustic coupling
to in-plane phonon modes could be suppressed while op-
tical coupling would still be present in agreement with
experimental indications. Investigation of this hypothe-
sis represents an interesting future research direction.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors thank Jordan Smith for useful discussions.
This work was supported by the Natural Sciences and En-
gineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) through
its Discovery Grant, Canadian Graduate Scholarships,
CREATE, and Strategic Project Grant programs; by Al-
berta Innovates through its Graduate Student Scholar-
ship program, and by the Alberta government through
its Graduate Excellence Scholarship (AGES) program.
We also acknowledge the Advanced Research Comput-
ing (ARC) IT team of the University of Calgary, and the
Digital Research Alliance of Canada (alliancecan.ca/en)
for computational resources.

[1] E. Knill, R. Laﬂamme, and G. J. Milburn, Nature 409,

[13] M. Toth and I. Aharonovich, Annual review of physical

46 (2001).

[2] P. Kok, W. J. Munro, K. Nemoto, T. C. Ralph, J. P.
Dowling, and G. J. Milburn, Reviews of Modern Physics
79, 135 (2007).

[3] T. Jennewein, U. Achleitner, G. Weihs, H. Weinfurter,
and A. Zeilinger, Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 71,
1675 (2000).

[4] M. Hoese, M. K. Koch, F. Breuning, N. Lettner, K. G.
Fehler, and A. Kubanek, Applied Physics Letters 120,
044001 (2022).

[5] N. Gisin and R. Thew, Nature Photonics 1, 165 (2007).
and
[6] N. Sangouard, C. Simon, H. De Riedmatten,

N. Gisin, Reviews of Modern Physics 83, 33 (2011).
[7] Y. Wu, J. Liu, and C. Simon, Physical Review A 101,

042301 (2020).

[8] N. Somaschi, V. Giesz, L. De Santis, J. Loredo, M. P.
Almeida, G. Hornecker, S. L. Portalupi, T. Grange,
C. Anton, J. Demory, et al., Nature Photonics 10, 340
(2016).

[9] J. C. Loredo, N. A. Zakaria, N. Somaschi, C. Anton,
L. De Santis, V. Giesz, T. Grange, M. A. Broome,
O. Gazzano, G. Coppola, et al., Optica 3, 433 (2016).
[10] A. Gale, C. Li, Y. Chen, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi,
and M. Toth, arXiv preprint

I. Aharonovich,
arXiv:2111.13441 (2021).

[11] W. F. Koehl, H. Seo, G. Galli, and D. D. Awschalom,

MRS Bulletin 40, 1146 (2015).

[12] Y.-M. He, G. Clark, J. R. Schaibley, Y. He, M.-C. Chen,
Y.-J. Wei, X. Ding, Q. Zhang, W. Yao, X. Xu, et al.,
Nature nanotechnology 10, 497 (2015).

chemistry 70, 123 (2019).

[14] N. Mendelson, D. Chugh, J. R. Reimers, T. S. Cheng,
A. Gottscholl, H. Long, C. J. Mellor, A. Zettl,
V. Dyakonov, P. H. Beton, et al., Nature materials 20,
321 (2021).

[15] T. T. Tran, K. Bray, M. J. Ford, M. Toth,

and

I. Aharonovich, Nature Nanotechnology 11, 37 (2016).

[16] X. Li, R. A. Scully, K. Shayan, Y. Luo, and S. Strauf,

ACS Nano 13, 6992 (2019).

[17] M. Kianinia, B. Regan, S. A. Tawﬁk, T. T. Tran, M. J.
Ford, I. Aharonovich, and M. Toth, ACS Photonics 4,
768 (2017).

[18] N. V. Proscia, Z. Shotan, H. Jayakumar, P. Reddy, C. Co-
hen, M. Dollar, A. Alkauskas, M. Doherty, C. A. Meriles,
and V. M. Menon, Optica 5, 1128 (2018).

[19] N. R. Jungwirth, B. Calderon, Y. Ji, M. G. Spencer,
M. E. Flatt´e, and G. D. Fuchs, Nano Letters 16, 6052
(2016).

[20] R. Bourrellier, S. Meuret, A. Tararan, O. St´ephan,
M. Kociak, L. H. Tizei, and A. Zobelli, Nano Letters
16, 4317 (2016).

[21] G. Grosso, H. Moon, B. Lienhard, S. Ali, D. K. Efe-
tov, M. M. Furchi, P. Jarillo-Herrero, M. J. Ford,
I. Aharonovich, and D. Englund, Nature Communica-
tions 8, 1 (2017).

[22] H. Z. J. Zeng, M. A. P. Ngyuen, X. Ai, A. Bennet, A. S.
Solnstev, A. Laucht, A. Al-Juboori, M. Toth, R. P. Mil-
dren, R. Malaney, et al., Optics Letters 47, 1673 (2022).
[23] S. White, C. Stewart, A. S. Solntsev, C. Li, M. Toth,
M. Kianinia, and I. Aharonovich, Optica 8, 1153 (2021).

10

[24] A. H¨ogele, S. Seidl, M. Kroner, K. Karrai, R. J. Warbur-
ton, B. D. Gerardot, and P. M. Petroﬀ, Physical Review
Letters 93, 217401 (2004).

[25] J. Houel, A. Kuhlmann, L. Greuter, F. Xue, M. Pog-
gio, B. Gerardot, P. Dalgarno, A. Badolato, P. Petroﬀ,
A. Ludwig, et al., Physical Review Letters 108, 107401
(2012).

[26] A. V. Kuhlmann, J. Houel, A. Ludwig, L. Greuter,
D. Reuter, A. D. Wieck, M. Poggio, and R. J. War-
burton, Nature Physics 9, 570 (2013).

[27] A. V. Kuhlmann, J. H. Prechtel, J. Houel, A. Ludwig,
D. Reuter, A. D. Wieck, and R. J. Warburton, Nature
Communications 6, 1 (2015).

[28] P. Tamarat, T. Gaebel, J. Rabeau, M. Khan, A. Green-
tree, H. Wilson, L. Hollenberg, S. Prawer, P. Hemmer,
F. Jelezko, et al., Physical Review Letters 97, 083002
(2006).

[29] A. Batalov, C. Zierl, T. Gaebel, P. Neumann, I.-Y.
Chan, G. Balasubramanian, P. Hemmer, F. Jelezko,
and J. Wrachtrup, Physical Review Letters 100, 077401
(2008).

[46] G. Davies, Journal of Physics C: Solid State Physics 7,

3797 (1974).

[47] K.-M. C. Fu, C. Santori, P. E. Barclay, L. J. Rogers, N. B.
Manson, and R. G. Beausoleil, Physical Review Letters
103, 256404 (2009).

[48] T. A. Abtew, Y. Sun, B.-C. Shih, P. Dev, S. Zhang, and
P. Zhang, Physical Review Letters 107, 146403 (2011).
[49] K. D. Jahnke, A. Sipahigil, J. M. Binder, M. W. Do-
herty, M. Metsch, L. J. Rogers, N. B. Manson, M. D.
Lukin,
and F. Jelezko, New Journal of Physics 17,
043011 (2015).

[50] J. Sakurai and J. Napolitano, Modern Quantum Me-
chanics 3rd ed. (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
England, 2021).

[51] O. Golami, K. Sharman, R. Ghobadi, S. C. Wein,
H. Zadeh-Haghighi, C. G. da Rocha, D. R. Salahub, and
C. Simon, Physical Review B 105, 184101 (2022).
[52] R. Heid, Emergent Phenomena in Correlated Matter

(2013).

[53] M. Verstraete and Z. Zanolli, (2014).
[54] G. P. Srivastava, The physics of phonons (Routledge,

[30] A. Dietrich, M. Doherty,

I. Aharonovich,

and

2019).

A. Kubanek, Physical Review B 101, 081401 (2020).
[31] M. Hoese, P. Reddy, A. Dietrich, M. K. Koch, K. G.
Fehler, M. W. Doherty, and A. Kubanek, Science Ad-
vances 6, eaba6038 (2020).

[32] C. Hepp, T. M¨uller, V. Waselowski, J. N. Becker, B. Pin-
gault, H. Sternschulte, D. Steinm¨uller-Nethl, A. Gali,
J. R. Maze, M. Atat¨ure, et al., Physical Review Letters
112, 036405 (2014).

[33] A. Gali, M. Fyta, and E. Kaxiras, Physical Review B

77, 155206 (2008).

[34] M. Abdi, J.-P. Chou, A. Gali, and M. B. Plenio, ACS

[55] A. Togo and I. Tanaka, Scripta Materialia 108, 1 (2015).
[56] F. Giustino, M. L. Cohen, and S. G. Louie, Physical

Review B 76, 165108 (2007).

[57] S. Ponc´e, E. R. Margine, C. Verdi, and F. Giustino,
Computer Physics Communications 209, 116 (2016).
[58] S. Li, J.-P. Chou, A. Hu, M. B. Plenio, P. Udvarhelyi,
G. Thiering, M. Abdi, and A. Gali, npj Quantum Infor-
mation 6, 1 (2020).

[59] G. Noh, D. Choi, J.-H. Kim, D.-G. Im, Y.-H. Kim,
H. Seo, and J. Lee, Nano Letters 18, 4710 (2018).
[60] S. Gao, H.-Y. Chen, and M. Bernardi, npj Computa-

Photonics 5, 1967 (2018).

tional Materials 7, 1 (2021).

[35] Y. Ping and T. J. Smart, Nature Computational Science

1, 646 (2021).

[36] C. Jara, T. Rauch, S. Botti, M. A. Marques, A. Noram-
buena, R. Coto, J. Castellanos- ´Aguila, J. R. Maze, and
F. Munoz, The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 125,
1325 (2021).

[37] J. Bhang, H. Ma, D. Yim, G. Galli, and H. Seo, ACS

Applied Materials & Interfaces 13, 45768 (2021).

[38] A. Sajid, J. R. Reimers, and M. J. Ford, Physical Review

B 97, 064101 (2018).

[39] V. Iv´ady, G. Barcza, G. Thiering, S. Li, H. Hamdi, J.-
P. Chou, ¨O. Legeza, and A. Gali, npj Computational
Materials 6, 1 (2020).

[40] A. Alkauskas, B. B. Buckley, D. D. Awschalom, and
C. G. Van de Walle, New Journal of Physics 16, 073026
(2014).

[41] L. Razinkovas, M. W. Doherty, N. B. Manson, C. G.
and A. Alkauskas, Physical Review B

Van de Walle,
104, 045303 (2021).

[42] T. Plakhotnik, M. W. Doherty, and N. B. Manson, Phys-

ical Review B 92, 081203 (2015).

[43] W. Kohn and L. J. Sham, Physical Review 140, A1133

(1965).

[44] F. Giustino, Reviews of Modern Physics 89, 015003

(2017).

[45] A. A. Maradudin, Solid State Physics, edited by F. Seitz
and D. Turnbull, Vol. 18 (Academic Press, New York,
1966) pp. 273–420.

[61] P. Giannozzi, S. Baroni, N. Bonini, M. Calandra, R. Car,
C. Cavazzoni, D. Ceresoli, G. L. Chiarotti, M. Cococ-
cioni, I. Dabo, et al., Journal of Physics: Condensed
Matter 21, 395502 (2009).

[62] P. Giannozzi, O. Andreussi, T. Brumme, O. Bunau,
M. B. Nardelli, M. Calandra, R. Car, C. Cavazzoni,
D. Ceresoli, M. Cococcioni, et al., Journal of Physics:
Condensed Matter 29, 465901 (2017).

[63] P. Giannozzi, O. Baseggio, P. Bonf`a, D. Brunato, R. Car,
I. Carnimeo, C. Cavazzoni, S. De Gironcoli, P. Delu-
gas, F. Ferrari Ruﬃno, et al., The Journal of Chemical
Physics 152, 154105 (2020).

[64] J. Noﬀsinger, F. Giustino, B. D. Malone, C.-H. Park,
S. G. Louie, and M. L. Cohen, Computer Physics Com-
munications 181, 2140 (2010).

[65] J. P. Perdew, K. Burke,

and M. Ernzerhof, Physical

Review Letters 77, 3865 (1996).

[66] P. E. Bl¨ochl, Physical Review B 50, 17953 (1994).
[67] T. Sohier, M. Calandra, and F. Mauri, Physical Review

B 96, 075448 (2017).

[68] C. Leon, M. Costa, L. Chico, and A. Latg´e, Scientiﬁc

Reports 9, 1 (2019).

[69] A. M. Satawara, G. A. Shaikh, S. K. Gupta, and P. Gaj-
jar, Materials Today: Proceedings 47, 529 (2021).
[70] P. Mir´o, M. Audiﬀred, and T. Heine, Chemical Society

Reviews 43, 6537 (2014).

[71] S. Angizi, M. A. Akbar, M. Darestani-Farahani,

and
P. Kruse, ECS Journal of Solid State Science and Tech-
nology 9, 083004 (2020).

11

[72] P. Huang, M. Grzeszczyk, K. Vaklinova, K. Watanabe,
T. Taniguchi, K. Novoselov, and M. Koperski, Physical
Review B 106, 014107 (2022).

[73] J. Zhang, R. Sun, D. Ruan, M. Zhang, Y. Li, K. Zhang,
F. Cheng, Z. Wang, and Z.-M. Wang, Journal of Applied
Physics 128, 100902 (2020).

[79] C. G. d. Rocha, A. R. Rocha, P. Venezuela, J. H. Garcia,
and M. S. Ferreira, Scientiﬁc Reports 8, 1 (2018).
[80] C. Castleton and S. Mirbt, Physical Review B 70, 195202

(2004).

[81] C. W. Castleton, A. H¨oglund, and S. Mirbt, Physical

Review B 73, 035215 (2006).

[74] D.-H. Kim, H.-S. Kim, M. W. Song, S. Lee, and S. Y.

[82] C. Freysoldt, J. Neugebauer, and C. G. Van de Walle,

Lee, Nano Convergence 4, 1 (2017).

Physical Review Letters 102, 016402 (2009).

[75] L. Liu, Y. Feng, and Z. Shen, Physical Review B 68,

[83] H.-P. Komsa, T. T. Rantala, and A. Pasquarello, Phys-

104102 (2003).

[76] P. J. Walla, Modern biophysical chemistry: detection and
analysis of biomolecules (John Wiley & Sons, 2014).
[77] A. Gali, E. Janz´en, P. De´ak, G. Kresse, and E. Kaxiras,

Physical Review Letters 103, 186404 (2009).

[78] R. di Meo, A. Dal Corso, P. Giannozzi, and S. Cozzini,

ical Review B 86, 045112 (2012).

[84] H. Kwee, S. Zhang, and H. Krakauer, Physical Review

Letters 100, 126404 (2008).

[85] S.-H. Yoo, M. Todorova, D. Wickramaratne, L. Weston,
and J. Neugebauer, npj Computational

C. G. Walle,
Materials 7, 1 (2021).

Proc. COST School (Trieste) (2009).

[86] J. Heyd, G. E. Scuseria, and M. Ernzerhof, The Journal

of Chemical Physics 118, 8207 (2003).

[87] A. Kubanek, arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.13184 (2022).

