Preprint 

An Overview on Designs and Applications of Context-Aware 
Automation Systems  
Nada Sahlab*, Nasser Jazdi*, Michael Weyrich* 

*University of Stuttgart, Institute of Industrial Automation and Software Engineering 
Pfaffenwaldring 47, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany. Firstname.lastname@ias.uni-stuttgart.de 

Abstract 

Automation systems are increasingly being used in dynamic and various operating conditions. With higher flexibility demands, 
they need to promptly respond to surrounding dynamic changes by adapting their operation. Context information collected during 
runtime can be useful to enhance the system’s adaptability. Context-aware systems represent a design paradigm for modeling and 
applying context in various applications such as decision-making. In order to address context for automation systems, a state-of-
the-art assessment of existing approaches is necessary. Thus, the objective of this work is to provide an overview on the design and 
applications of context and context models for automation systems. A systematic literature review has been conducted, the results 
of which are represented as a knowledge graph.  

Keywords: Systematic Literature Review; context-aware automation systems; cyber-physical systems; knowledge graph 

1. Introduction 

Automation systems are continuously evolving and seamlessly integrating in almost all aspects of life. Examples 
span from the manufacturing domain to surgical  rooms, vehicular  systems as well  the own living space. This vast 
representation exposes systems to dynamic operating conditions such as varying environmental conditions or dynamic 
networking  and  interactions  with  other  systems  or  users.  Therefore,  automation  systems  need  to  adapt  to  these 
conditions by enhancing their decision-making capabilities at runtime [1]. Context-awareness is a system’s ability to 
perceive its operational conditions and relate it to the system operation. Context-awareness has been established in the 
past decades in the areas of pervasive computing and is mitigating from customizing applications and services based 
on pre-defined context parameters to a holistic system’s ability to support its autonomy and operation under varying 
surrounding  conditions.  [2–4]  In  a  recent  study,  industry  practitioners  were  asked  to  assess  context-aware 
functionalities  in  requirements-based  systems  engineering.  The  result  indicates  that  including  context-aware 
functionalities is a valuable system feature. However, a clear challenge lies in the lack of experience and standards for 
designing systems to be context-aware. [5] Several survey papers addressed context from several perspectives, such 
as on an architectural level, with relation to the Internet of Things and from the perspective of intelligent environments 
as opposed to computer science. They demonstrate the evolution and extension of the context applicability and scope 
and  show  variations  in  its  definition,  classification  and  categorization,  modeling  as  well  as  reasoning  approaches. 
These surveys give a significant overview, but address projects and contributions, which are outdated considering the 
fast-paced advancements of the past 5 years in automation systems. Furthermore, the existing literature reviews are 
only partly focused on the role of context for cyber-physical automation systems.  

1877-0509 Preprint 

 
 
 
 
 
2 

Sahlab et al./ Preprint 

Paradigms of the Internet of Things (IoT), Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) as well as the increasing application of 
Artificial  Intelligence  (AI)  contribute  to  enhancing  the  acquisition  and  processing  of  embedded  and  connected 
heterogeneous data as well as applying remote computing resources to analyze and make predictions. They are both 
enablers for increased context-awareness and can also benefit from considering context to enhance decision-making 
and the overall system performance.  

For this reason, in this work, we investigate methods and applications of considering context within the operation 
of automation systems from the past 5 years by presenting the results of a conducted systematic literature review. The 
findings are represented in the form of a knowledge graph to enable knowledge inference, gaining insights about the 
methodological developments in the past years as well as making projections about its increasing significance. This 
contemporary analysis shows the added value of considering context for the systems and classifies applied methods 
for its modeling and processing. 

2. Preliminaries 

In  order  to  proceed  with  investigating  and  analyzing  the  existing  approaches,  it  is  essential  to  introduce  some 
definitions and concepts related to context-aware systems in the domain of networked automation systems, while also 
providing a definition of the latter. 

2.1. Cyber-Physical Automation Systems 

Cyber-Physical  Systems  denote  an  integration  of  hardware-based  systems  with  a  cyber-representation.  [6]  The 
hardware  part  constitutes  of  physical  sensors,  actuators,  embedded  computing  units  as  well  as  networking  and 
communication interfaces, while the cyber part includes digital models and further modules supporting the operation 
of the system. [7] Depending on the granularity and availability of the system’s models, a CPS can have a Digital 
Twin within the cyber-layer when considering further aspects such as the synchronization of the physical and virtual 
system, relations between virtual models as well as the ability these models to be used for simulations. [8] [9] Due to 
the  networking  abilities,  CPS  can  collaborate  with  other  CPS  in  a  dynamic  and  flexible  manner.  [10]  The 
communication interfaces  allow for using  remote computing resources, which  supports the  increased use  of AI to 
analyze streaming CPS data and influence its operation. 

2.2. Context-Aware Systems 

Context-aware systems are, for the scope of this work, considered as automation systems capable of relating their 
runtime context to the system’s operation. They can therefore acquire context parameters, process, and include them 
in  the  decision-making  process.  This  ability  can  either  be an  integral  part  of  the  system  or  via  remote  computing 
resources with interfaces to the system’s operating environment. Some publications include the ability to identify, 
consider and adapt functionalities based on context as context-awareness, whereas others refer to the latter as context-
adaptivity. [3] Context-awareness may optionally lead to an adaptation but can also enable an improved analysis of 
the system or faults.  

Many publications considering context first provide a definition of it. This is due to the fact that defining context 

is in itself dependent on the context of its application. [11, 12] 

Convinced  that  there  is  no  universally  applicable  definition,  some  publications  describe  context  as  a  relational 
property providing a better understanding of a situation. [12] In linguistics, context is an implicit property that leads 
to  making  alternate  or  guided  conclusions  about  speech  or  text.  Cognitively,  context  is  an  ability  in  the  line  of 
reasoning to extract and transfer historic or present contextual conditions in a present occurrence and use this meta-
level information to expand one’s own knowledge about historic, present or future occurrences. [13] For software 
applications and services, context refers to a description of relevant situational parameters, in which the application 
and  service  operate.  [14]  Identifying  the  relevance  of  these  parameters  to  the  applications  as  well  as  detecting 
variations of them aims at improving the functions delivered to the users of this application in terms of varying the 
functionality based on variation of the context parameters. Given these definitions and meta-understanding of what 

 
Sahlab et al./ Preprint 

 3 

constitutes  context,  a  proper  description  for  cyber-physical  automation  systems  can  be  as  follows.  Regarding  the 
physical  parts  of  the  system,  context  refers  to  information  from  the  physical  environment  of  the  CPS,  which 
characterize its state and contribute to a better understanding of its operation and analysis of its data in the cyber layer. 
[15] 

3. A Systematic Literature Review on Context-Awareness for Automation Systems 

In this chapter, the conducted systematic literature review is presented. Starting with briefly addressing available 
survey papers addressing the same topic, the design characteristics with the research questions and inclusion criteria 
are then presented, followed by a synthesis of the results and an analysis of the investigated literature, which comprised 
of 153 publications. 

3.1. Previous Surveys on Context-Aware Systems 

Several surveys capturing state of the art with regard to context already exist; they each have different foci and 

perspectives. Some of these surveys are briefly described below. 

1.  “The practical role of context modelling in the elicitation of context-aware functionalities” 

In this survey [5], software engineering to support ubiquitous computing is set in focus. The aim of the survey 
was  to  show  present  approaches  and  identify  gaps  for  considering  contextual  elements  in  requirements 
engineering  for  practitioners  to  elicit  context-aware  functionalities.  The  scope  was  for  applications  and 
designing a context model, from which functionalities later on can be derived. The study aimed at assessing 
the effort and knowledge required. For this reason, 37 professionals were interviewed.  
The results show that although context-aware functionalities were valued, context modelling was perceived 
as complex with a lack of standardized design approaches and domain expertise. 

2.  “Context Provisioning Middleware” 

In [3] from 2013, the focus was on context middleware to encompass the steps and functions necessary for 
context  provisioning.  The  study  highlighted  on  context  classification  based  on  spatial,  temporal,  device, 
network  and  communication, environment,  user,  activity,  among  others.  The evolution  of  context  and  its 
widening scope was addressed as well. Then, an architectural evaluation of middleware design approaches 
was presented, for which 16 projects were investigated.  
Context awareness was found to be a key feature for ubiquitous computing. Furthermore, a future projection 
predicted that the number of context parameters will increase with the advancement of the Internet of things. 

3.  “Context Aware Computing for The Internet of Things”  

[4] investigated literature from 2001-2011, where 50 projects were portrayed. The focus lied in context-aware 
computing of sensor data. Primary and secondary context were described as categories and a list of context 
types was provided. The study highlighted on challenges for identifying sensor context and that IoT requires 
the application of different modelling, acquisition, and reasoning techniques for context.  
The clear importance of context for IoT was also highlighted. 
4.  “A Survey on the Evolution of the Notion of Context-Awareness”  

[13] investigated approaches for context reasoning from 2 different perspectives, namely AI and Intelligent 
Environments (IE). Differences and synergies between both fields were described. While the focus of AI lies 
in learning context for knowledge representation and inclusion in the line of reasoning, IE adopts a more 
pragmatic approach for what can be identified as context by a system and what it enables the system to do. 
The consideration of context for IE should support the transition from techno-centered to human-centered 
systems, where the technology adapts to humans and not the other way around, elevating systems from simple 
automation to intelligent ones. Context learning is essential was highlighted to be an essential step for this 
transition.  

5.  “A consolidated view of context for intelligent systems”  

[11], a study of 2017, 36 context models were viewed that enable systems to adapt their behaviour. Sources 
of  publications  were  also  indicated  (ACM,  IEEE  and  Web  of  Science),  snowball  search  method  was 
conducted,  where  from  47  publications  36  were  extracted.  The  respective  context  models  from  various 
application fields were then analysed in terms of the elements considered in the model and the variety of 

 
 
4 

Sahlab et al./ Preprint 

those elements was presented.  
User  and  environmental  context  parameters  were  prominent  among  the  investigated  models.  Lastly, 
consolidated findings about used context elements were presented. 

The surveys studied address different aspects of context. However, one can draw a few general conclusions. The 

authors would like to present the following relevant conclusions from the investigated papers: 

 

It  is  evident  that  the role  of  context  for  enhancing  cyber-physical  automation  systems  is  significant  and  is 
increasingly considered by system designers and industry practitioners.  

  An evolution in what constitutes context as well as which methods can be applied to support its acquisition 
and analysis exists. Context modeling approaches are therefore needed to have an underlying representation 
of contextual elements and enable a dynamic extension. Hybrid approaches for processing and learning based 
on the context model should be applied.  

3.2. Design Preliminaries 

A  Systematic  Literature  Review  (SLR)  is  a  structured  manner  for  performing  surveys  on  scientific  topics  by 
following a predefined plan. It has three main phases, a definition phase, where the problem statement and research 
questions is defined. Based on the scope, the review is designed with keywords as well as inclusion and exclusion 
criteria. In the second phase, the review is conducted by searching, filtering and analyzing found results. In the third 
phase, the results are presented. [16] Our goal is to capture the state of art for making projections about the future 
direction for context-aware systems in the field of automation technology. Usually, SLRs are conducted manually. In 
our approach, we designed a mechanism to automate parts of the search as well as represent the results in the form of 
a connected graph to enable an improved analysis. We adopted the characteristics of an SLR in our conducted survey 
in the following form:  

Research Questions 

In our survey, we formulated the research questions based on What, How, Why and Where:  
  What:  Referring  to  the  scope  of  context  in  a  publication,  how  it  is  defined  and  how  variable  the  context 

parameters are.  

  How: Referring to the methods used for modeling and reasoning over context.  
  Where: Application areas within automation technology, for which context is considered.  
  Why: The added value that context brings in a certain use case.  

Keywords 

For the inserted keywords, some variations were considered to assess a wider scope of publications in the desired 
domain. A combination of context-awareness and industrial automation system sets the desired search scope. For each 
of both keywords, some variations are possible, which were considered. These variations are shown in Table 1.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
Sahlab et al./ Preprint 

 5 

Table 1. Keyword variations 

Keywords 

[( Context Awareness ) OR  

Field of Application 

(Automation Systems) 
OR 

(Context sensitive) OR (Context adaptive) 
OR  (Context alone) ] AND  

(Production Systems) 
OR 

(Mechatronic Systems) 
OR 

(Control Systems) OR 

(Cyber Physical 
Systems) OR 

(Knowledge-Based 
Assistance Systems) OR 

(Autonomous Systems) 
OR 

(Manufacturing 
Systems) OR 

(Smart Factory) OR 

Inclusion Criteria 

Next, the following inclusion criteria were defined for the survey: 
  The publications considered should be from the past 5 years. 
  The publication language should be English. 
  The publication should consider automation systems with no restriction on the domain such as the industrial 

or daily living one.  

Exclusion Criteria 

The exclusion criteria considered for this survey were as follows:  
  Work  only  focusing  on  context-awareness  for  service  orchestration  or  recommendation  systems  without  a 
relation  to  automation  systems  is  excluded,  including  work  on  mobile  application  development  or  service 
design. 

  Publications addressing context-aware computing in terms of data analysis, networking or routing without a 

relevance to an automation system are excluded. 

  Survey papers, invited/ featured articles or papers addressing current and future trends without proposing a 
specific approach for considering context will be taken as reference and benchmark for the conclusions drawn 
from this SLR but will not be a part of it.  

Databases 

Choosing  the sources  of  a  literature review  is  an  essential  step  and  influences  the  scope  of  analysis,  hence  the 
results. Therefore, the choice of the database was based on reviewed publications, either from conferences or journal 
publications  that  have  been  peer-reviewed.  The  digital  libraries  considered  for  the  search  procedure  were  the 
following: 

IEEE Xplore 

 
  ACM Digital Library 
  Wiley  
  Science Direct 
  SpringerLink 

The  search  methodology  used  the  extended  search  feature  to  consider  the  inclusion  criteria.  The  access  to  the 
database was possible for IEEE, Wiley as well as SpringerLink, partial access was available on SpringerLink as well 
as  ACM.  In  these  cases,  the  screening  was  based  on  the  title,  the  keywords  as  well  as  the  abstract.  Pre-prints  or 
available copies stored on the author’s personal or institutional websites were acquired accordingly. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 

4. Results 

Sahlab et al./ Preprint 

For the analysis and results part, this investigation takes a new approach. First, an  overview  on  the application 
domains, the context modeling and reasoning methods related to each publication are extracted and represented as a 
knowledge graph. For each publication, some key aspects are shown, such as the name of the publication, its authors, 
publication year, publisher, URL as well as citation count. The knowledge graph representation approach is discussed 
in the following section and provides an overview on the applied methods. In the second part of the analysis, selected 
approaches from literature are chosen, which consider context as a system enabling characteristic and address methods 
to its dynamic modeling and provisioning at runtime.  

4.1. Statistics about the literature findings 

Based  on  the  design  preliminaries  and  the  exclusion  and  inclusion  criteria,  a  total  of  153  publications  were 
considered  and  further  analysed.  Figure  1  shows  some  classifications.  Most  of  the  publications  were  from 
Springerlink,  whereas  IEEEXplore  came  in  second  place.  An  initial  categorization  shows  that  the  industrial 
automation domain takes the lead, with more  emerging publications  considering context-awareness in the  field of 
transport and mobility. A possible explanation is that the industrial domain increasingly adopts methods to realize 
Industry 4.0 concepts whereas considering autonomous vehicles is increasing. 

Fig. 1. Classification on filtered literature based on database and application domain 

Fig.  1  shows  selected  use  cases,  for  which  context  was  considered  and  was  expected  to  bring  an  added  value. 
Decision-making support takes the lead in those use-cases, whereas use cases such as energy efficiency, process and 
data management and increasing safety also considered context in significant numbers.  

Fig. 3 shows a further correlation of considering and using context with different systems or approaches. Half of 
the  publications  addressed  context-aware  computing,  whereas  some  addressed  autonomous  or  self-aware  systems. 
13% used context in relation with data collection or processing. Data constituting context mostly came from sensor 
data, while very few approaches considered further heterogeneous data sources such as documents and further media. 

 
 
 
 
 
Sahlab et al./ Preprint 

 7 

5

Applications of Context
fault detection
human-machine Interaction
process&data management
energy efficiency
decision-making support
optimizatin
Safety

12
11

8

8

13

26

0

10

20

30

Fig. 2. Classification on filtered literature based on database and application domain 

data collection & processing 
(data fusion)
13%

Self-Awareness
16%

context-aware 

computing
50%

Autonomous Systems
21%

Fig. 3. Classification on filtered literature based on database and application domain 

4.2. Representation as Knowledge Graph 

A knowledge graph is an approach to represent emerging knowledge, while highlighting on the relations between 
modeled entities. [8] With this representation, deriving conclusions and inferring new knowledge is possible. Based 
on the SLR criteria introduced, the resulted literature was mapped into a knowledge graph. The aim was to be able to 
analyze emerging approaches and show possible relations between the methods used for modeling and reasoning on 
context. The knowledge graph was created as a labeled property graph with an imported CSV file with the extracted 
results. The number of publications investigated was 153. Each publication node was represented as the metamodel 
shown in Fig. 4. Using cypher queries, parts of the modeled knowledge graph can be extracted and the relation to 
other  entities  shows.  For  example,  when  it  comes  to  context  modeling,  extracted  approaches  are  related  to  each 
publication. Fig. 5a shows the mapping of the modeling approaches to the publications. It is evident, that the modeling 
approaches have some relations to each other and that a publication can have more than one modeling approach. 

Predominantly,  context  is  modeled  as  a  graph  to  highlight  on  the  contextual  relations  as  well.  A  graph-based 
approaches comes in relation to the ontological one, for example, an ontology can be represented as an RDF graph.  
Key value pairs also come in relations to graph, for example, when modeling context using property graphs with 

further properties described as key-value pairs.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 

Sahlab et al./ Preprint 

Fig. 4. Structure of the publication node in relation to citation count, classification, database, keywords, year of publication as well as context 
modeling and reasoning approach 

a                                                                                               b  

Fig. 5. a: context modeling approaches classified. b: context reasoning approaches classified  

Hybrid modeling approaches are emerging as a way to accommodate and manage the increasing complexity of the 
context parameters and set focus on their relationships to each other and the system. It should be noted that not all 
publications had a context model. 

As for context reasoning and analysis approaches, a query showing this graph extract can be seen on Figure 5b. 
The publication nodes are mapped to different methods extracted and generalized from the analyzed literature. Here, 
relations  between  different  approaches  are  also  present,  showing  the  increased  employment  of  hybrid  reasoning 
approaches. Counter to the previous surveys, emerging AI-methods such as clustering and hidden Markov layers are 
employed, as opposed to rule-based reasoning approaches, which are mostly used in combination with ontologies. 

For publications with a context model, reasoning was based on a closed world assumption with a gap for applying 
methods of unsupervised learning or the extraction  of  features  to improve unsupervised learning techniques. How 
closely modeling is related or suitable for reasoning is an aspect that still needs to be investigated.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sahlab et al./ Preprint 

 9 

4.3. Selected Approaches 

The investigated publications mostly used either a context model or considered a few context parameters for data 
processing while realizing the different use cases. The scope of context parameters is concluded to be limited and 
static. The focus is therefore set on some prominent approaches that propose structured approaches to consider an 
evolving context scope at runtime. These approaches are presented below.  

 

 

  Cameonto [17]: In this approach, a meta ontology was defined with major classes to reflect on common context 
entities and to enable a transferability across various application domains. For each of the necessary steps for 
using context such as detection, acquisition and application, services have been defined in a middleware-based 
architecture. 
In the “The CASAD Matrix Method” [18] an approach to assist system designers in  documenting, analyzing 
and optimizing context-aware systems is introduced. The approach applies a matrix-based method to represent 
context-related properties and their correlations in a structured manner, thereby reducing the complexity of 
designing  a  context-aware  system.  Noteworthy  is  that  the  proposed,  domain-agnostic  matrix  allows  for 
different degrees of detail to be considered and the use of sub-systems 
“Designing context-aware systems” [12]: A method for understanding and analysing context in practice: In 
this work, a structured approach is proposed  that enables the identification  of  relevant  context  upon which 
needed system components to detect and adapt to the it can be determined. The process starts with identifying 
a problem, then analyzing which context elements can be applied to address the problem. In a following step, 
needed sensors and actuators to acquire context and adapt the system functionality in a rule-based manner are 
chosen.  
In this work [10], an approach to identify and analyse the context of a Cyber-Physical System within a dynamic 
network of CPS by using view-centric context modeling is proposed. The work aims at enabling CPS to be 
more  self-adaptive by detecting  their  emergent behavior. Based  on  the  system  functionality,  shared  and  at 
runtime emerging functional dependencies between different CPS can be determined and documented as an 
architectural view using the Unified Modeling Language.  The approach is limited to a specific use case and 
as the authors state, can be embedded into an established context modeling approach and verified by further 
ongoing use cases. 

 

5. Summary and Conclusions 

Systematic Literature Reviews aim at investigating current approaches to conclude a research gap or determine a 

futuristic approach. They represent a significant part of a research activity, based on which new concepts stem.  

In this work, an overview on the design, modeling, and reasoning of context for automation systems was provided. 
The  automation  systems  under  consideration  were  cyber-physical  systems,  due  to  their  cyber-representation  and 
networking abilities that can foster the design and analysis of context. The SLR was processed in a structured manner 
and the findings represented in the form of a connected graph.  

The main findings can be summarized as follows:  

As for the application areas, these conclusions can be made: 

  A prominent domain for using context is the industrial domain due to the maturity and readiness of Industry 
4.0 and CPS concepts e.g., the Digital Twin. However, a combination of context modeling for the Digital Twin 
is still not widely addressed in the previous publications and remains a potential for future work. 
  The mobility domain is also increasing focus on context-awareness to support system autonomy. 
  The  health  sector  still  has  potential,  after  overcoming  challenges  with  data  privacy,  focusing  on  the  main 

context elements, the patient in a continuously evolving manner. 

As for the added value that context brings, these conclusions can be made: 

  The added values are mostly placed in the operational phase of the system. Most approaches aim at actively 
influencing  the  operation  at  runtime,  decision-making:  optimization  or  reconfiguration.  Monitoring  and 
predictive maintenance was also addressed.  

 
 
10 

Sahlab et al./ Preprint 

  Motivation for considering context dealing with dynamic systems in a network, large amounts of data or the 
increasing complexity. Other motivations included adaptation to dynamic  environments, Increasing  system 
autonomy as well as consideration of flexibility requirements.  

  A prominent aspect found was the involvement and consideration of actors which can be operators, patients, 

or drivers. 

  Not all literature included an explicit context model, some of which presented approaches for context-aware 
computing  within  the  scope  of  automation  systems.  Of  the  publications  haven  an  explicit  context  model, 
ontological  or  graph-based  modelling  are  prominent,  which  use  the  semantic  expressiveness  and  represent 
relations between entities.  

  As for reasoning, hybrid approaches combining semantic modelling and machine learning are not yet widely 

considered and present a further potential for future work.  

 References 

[1] K. Bellman et al., “Self-aware Cyber-Physical Systems,” ACM Trans. Cyber-Phys. Syst., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 1–26, 2020, doi: 10.1145/3375716. 

[2] S. Scholze, J. Barata, and D. Stokic, “Holistic Context-Sensitivity for Run-Time Optimization of Flexible Manufacturing Systems,” Sensors 

(Basel, Switzerland), vol. 17, no. 3, 2017, doi: 10.3390/s17030455. 

[3] M. Knappmeyer, S. L.  Kiani, E. S. Reetz, N. Baker, and R. Tonjes, “Survey of Context Provisioning Middleware,” IEEE  Commun. Surv. 

Tutorials, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 1492–1519, 2013, doi: 10.1109/SURV.2013.010413.00207. 

[4] C. Perera, A. Zaslavsky, P. Christen, and D. Georgakopoulos, “Context Aware Computing for The Internet of Things: A Survey,” IEEE Commun. 

Surv. Tutorials, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 414–454, 2014, doi: 10.1109/SURV.2013.042313.00197. 

[5]  R.  Falcao,  K.  Villela,  V.  Vieira,  M.  Trapp,  and  I.  L.  de  Faria,  “The  practical  role  of  context  modeling  in  the elicitation  of  context-aware 
functionalities: a survey,” in 2021 IEEE 29th International Requirements Engineering Conference (RE), Notre Dame, IN, USA, Sep. 2021 - 
Sep. 2021, pp. 35–45. 

[6] F. Tao, Q. Qi, L. Wang, and A. Nee, “Digital Twins and Cyber–Physical Systems toward Smart Manufacturing and Industry 4.0: Correlation 

and Comparison,” Engineering, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 653–661, 2019, doi: 10.1016/j.eng.2019.01.014. 

[7] N. Jazdi, “Cyber physical systems in the context of Industry 4.0,” in 2014 IEEE International Conference on Automation, Quality and Testing, 

Robotics: 22 - 24 May 2014, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 2014, pp. 1–4. 

[8] N. Sahlab, S. Kamm, T. Muller, N. Jazdi, and M. Weyrich, “Knowledge Graphs as Enhancers of Intelligent Digital Twins,” in 2021 4th IEEE 
International Conference on Industrial Cyber-Physical Systems (ICPS): Online, 10-13 May, 2021, Victoria, BC, Canada, 2021, pp. 19–24. 

[9]  B.  Ashtari  Talkhestani  et  al.,  “An  architecture  of  an  Intelligent  Digital  Twin  in  a  Cyber-Physical  Production  System,”  at  - 

Automatisierungstechnik, vol. 67, no. 9, pp. 762–782, 2019, doi: 10.1515/auto-2019-0039. 

[10] B. Tenbergen, M. Daun, P. Aluko Obe, and j. Brings, “View-Centric Context Modeling to Foster the Engineering of Cyber-Physical System 
Networks,” in 2018 IEEE 15th International Conference on Software Architecture: ICSA 2018 : proceedings, Seattle, WA, 2018, pp.  206–
20609. 

[11] C. Bauer and A. Novotny, “A consolidated view of context for intelligent systems,” AIS, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 377–393, 2017, doi: 10.3233/AIS-

170445. 

[12] S. van Engelenburg, M. Janssen, and B. Klievink, “Designing context-aware systems: A method for understanding and analysing context in 

practice,” Journal of Logical and Algebraic Methods in Programming, vol. 103, pp. 79–104, 2019, doi: 10.1016/j.jlamp.2018.11.003. 

[13] Patrick Brézillon, “Context in Artificial Intelligence II. Key Elements of Contexts,” Comput. Artif. Intell., vol. 18, no. 5, 1999. 

[14] A. K. Dey, “Understanding and Using Context,” Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 4–7, 2001, doi: 10.1007/s007790170019. 

[15] N. Sahlab, N. Jazdi and M. Weyrich, “An Approach for Context-Aware Cyber-Physical Automation Systems”, IFAC-PapersOnLine, Volume 

54, Issue 4, 2021, Pages 171-176, ISSN 2405-8963, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ifacol.2021.10.029.  

[16] Y. Xiao and M. Watson, “Guidance on Conducting a Systematic Literature Review,” Journal of Planning Education and Research, vol. 39, no. 

1, pp. 93–112, 2019, doi: 10.1177/0739456X17723971. 

[17] J. Aguilar, M. Jerez, and T. Rodríguez, “CAMeOnto: Context awareness meta ontology modeling,” Applied Computing and Informatics, vol. 

14, no. 2, pp. 202–213, 2018, doi: 10.1016/j.aci.2017.08.001. 

[18] P. Rosenberger, M. Grafinger, D. Gerhard, M. Hennig, and S. Dumss, “The CASAD Matrix Method: Introduction of a Technique for the 
Documentation,  Analysis,  and  Optimization  of  Context-Aware  Systems,”  Procedia  CIRP,  vol.  91,  pp.  427–432,  2020,  doi: 
10.1016/j.procir.2020.03.106.   

 
 
