2
2
0
2

n
u
J

4
2

]

C
D
.
s
c
[

1
v
5
8
0
2
1
.
7
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

EFFICIENT RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN CLOUD
ENVIRONMENT

A PREPRINT

Smruti Rekha Swaina, Ashutosh Kumar Singha, Chung Nan Leeb
aDepartment of Computer Applications, National Institute of Technology,
Kurukshetra, Haryana-136119, India
bDepartment of Computer Science and Engineering, National Sun Yat-sen University,
Kaohsiung, 804201, Taiwan

Abstract.

In cloud computing resource management plays a signiﬁcant role in data centres and it is directly dependent on the
application workload. Various services such as Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS), and
Software as a Service (SaaS) are offered by cloud computing to provide compute, network, and storage capabilities
to the cloud users utilizing the pay-per-usage approach. Resource allocation is a prior solution to address various
demanding situations like the under/overload handling, resource wastage, load balancing, Quality-of-Services (QoS)
violations, VM migration and many more. The primary aim of Virtual Machine Placement (VMP) is mapping of Virtual
Machines (VMs) to physical machines (PMs), such that the PMs may be utilized to their maximum efﬁciency, where
the already active VMs are not to be interrupted. It provides a list of live VM migrations that must be accomplished to
get the optimum solution and reduces energy consumption to a larger extent. The inefﬁcient VMP leads to wastage of
resources, excessive energy consumption and also increase overall operational cost of the data center. On this context,
this article provides an extensive survey of resource management schemes in cloud environment. A conceptual scheme
for resource management, grouping of current machine learning based resource allocation strategies, and fundamental
problems of ineffective distribution of physical resources are analyzed. Thereafter, a complete survey of existing
techniques in machine learning based mechanisms in the ﬁeld of cloud resource management are explained. Ultimately,
the paper explores and concludes distinct approaching challenges and future research guidelines associated to resource
management in cloud environment.

Keywords Virtual Machines, Physical Machines, Virtual Machine Placement, Resource Management, VM Migration

1

Introduction

Cloud computing (CC) is an imminent distributed computing model that offers on-demand and low-cost shared
computing resources to users [1]-[5]. It is an appropriate platform for large amount of data processing due to its
on-demand elasticity or ﬂexibility, incredibly low-latency and highly scalable processing capabilities[6][7]. CC is an
inevitable distributed computing model that offers on-demand and low-cost shared computing resources to users[8][9].
It is an appropriate platform for a large amount of data processing due to its on-demand elasticity or ﬂexibility, extremely
low latency, and massively parallel processing features [10]. To deal with the ever growing and dynamic requests of
cloud clients, it is necessary to achieve the Quality of Service (QoS) level among cloud clients and their cloud service
providers (CSP) [11]. The CSPs must ensure proper synchronization among resource and power management within
the data center while maintaining the required QoS for hosted applications. The efﬁciency of a data center substantially
depends upon how VMs are sustained and where they are placed [12][13]. The process of selecting the most appropriate
physical machine (PM) in large cloud data centers is termed as VMP mechanism. The high power consumption inside
the data center is due to the low utilization of computing resources such as CPU, memory, etc [14]-[16]. In the idle
state, the server machines consume about 60%-70% power of their maximum power. High-energy consumption leads to
an increase in the overall operational cost of the data center[17]-[20]. CC models are classiﬁed into two categories, i.e.,
the service model and the deployment model. Organizations choose a speciﬁc model based on their requirement. Fig. 1
shows the conceptual resource management framework in a cloud environment.

 
 
 
 
 
 
Efﬁcient Resource Management in Cloud Environment

A PREPRINT

Figure 1: Conceptual Resource Management Framework in a Cloud Environment

The process of allocating various resources, i.e., memory, storage, and bandwidth, to a set of applications is termed
resource management[21]. The Cloud Service Providers (CSPs) must ensure efﬁcient and effective resource utilization
by following the Service Level Agreements (SLAs) with the cloud users. Cloud data centers use virtualization
technology in order to get minimum energy usage and maximum resource usage. Virtualization allows to sharing of
the resources of the same PM among various VMs [22]. Depending upon the incoming demands list of VMs can be
dynamically allocated and de-allocated in a single PM. Each VM has its own characteristics and consumes a distinct
amount of power based on resource usage. Server consolidation approaches are used to consolidate the workloads
on a fewer number of machines, and unused resources can be switched to a low-power mode or can be turned off to
save energy [23]. Efﬁcient VM mechanisms assign VMs to PMs in such a way as to increase resource usage, which
reduces the number of active PMs. Hence, minimum energy consumption is achieved. Fig 2. shows the details of cloud
computing models.

Resource management of cloud data centers is the major challenge which can be classiﬁed into three different levels,
i.e., workload management at the application level, virtual machine level, and physical machine levels, as shown in Fig.
3. At the application level, during task scheduling and task assignment operations, various management techniques
are required. Task assignment refers to the selection of appropriate VMs for task execution, and task scheduling
deals with the selection of a task for its execution. Task scheduling and task assignment can be achieved by using
various mechanisms, as shown in Fig. 3. At the virtual machine level, workload management can be divided into
three categories, i.e., VM assignment, VM consolidation, and VM assignment. The process of selecting the most
appropriate PMs for VM is referred as VM assignment or VM placement. VM migration is referred as moving VMs
from over/under-loaded PMs to a selected optimal PM, and VM consolidation is a technique to place VMs on the
minimum number of PMs in order to reduce energy consumption and improve resource utilization. Various VM
placement and VM migration approaches are shown in Fig. 3. Server consolidation, over/under-load handling at the
server, and resource provisioning are the primary operations associated with resource management at the physical
level. The server consolidation is a technique that minimizes the number of active PMs by using power-efﬁcient
VMP approaches. The over/under-load handling deals with the identiﬁcation of respective conditions at the server and
mitigates its impact by using VM migration. The efﬁcient distribution of physical resources among VMs before the
arrival of the actual workload from cloud users is referred as resource provisioning. Different under/over-load handling
mechanisms and resource provisioning approaches are illustrated in Fig. 3.

2

Application 1Application 2Application mRequestRequestRequestResponseResponseResponseCloud  UsersResource Management System atCloud Data CenterVM Management UnitTask Management UnitVirtual Machine PlacementVirtual Machine MigrationOver-Under Load HandlerTask Scheduling/AssignmentTask Execution/ProcessingTask Receive/ DispatchCloud Data CenterCluster ofserversResource RequestResponseResourceRequestResponseResponseResourceRequestEfﬁcient Resource Management in Cloud Environment

A PREPRINT

Figure 2: Cloud Computing Models

Figure 3: Resource Management Techniques

3

Cloud Computing ModelsService ModelsDeployment ModelsIaaSSaaSPaaSPublic CloudPrivate CloudHybrid CloudCommunityCloudService ofHardwareresourcesService ofApplicationsService ofPlatformsResources areavailable forpublic useResources areavailable for anorganizationCombination ofpublic and privatecloudServes as commonfunction(Mission,policies,security)ServerConsolidationVitual Machine LevelApplication LevelTaskSchedulingTaskAssignmentPhysical Machine LevelVMAssignmentVMConsolidationVM MigrationResourceProvisioningUnder/overLoad HandlingTraditional MethodLIFO,FIFO, SJF etc.Constrained basedCost, deadline etc.Hybrid MethodsEvolutionaryOptimization MethodsOther migrationMethodsTraditional MethodsSingle ObjectiveOptimization MethodMulti ObjectiveOptimization MethodEvolutionaryOptimization MethodGame TheoryMethodsFuzzy MethodsProbabilisticMethodsOther MigrationMethodsLive VM MigrationsMethodsProactive VMMigration MethodsEnergy ConsumptionAware MethodsNetwork Transimissionaware MethodsOther MigrationMethodsStatic Thresholdbased  methodsRegression basedmethodsAdaptive Utilizationbased  methodsOther MethodsTraditional MethodsBin packingAlgorithmsHeuristicOptimizationsSLA/QoS BasedMethodsHybrid MethodsOther MethodsVirtual Resource Management  Techniques at Different LevelsEfﬁcient Resource Management in Cloud Environment

A PREPRINT

2 Motivation

To deal with the ever-growing and dynamic demands of cloud clients, a huge number of VMs are placed on more PMs.
The VMP performs a crucial role in power consumption, resource utilization, and the overall operational cost of the
data center. High power consumption within the data center is due to inefﬁcient use of these resources. Excess energy
consumption by cloud data centers facilities high operational costs and, in turn, increases carbon dioxide (CO2) levels
indirectly. It has been noted that cooling systems and PMs collectively use approximately 70% of the overall power used
in a data center [24][18]. Power consumption, resource utilization and carbon foot print are fundamental components
for CSPs to control operational costs. Due to unbalanced VM placement, most of the time, it has been observed that
resources are either underutilized or overloaded, which leads to wastage of resources and compromises the quality of
service parameters. The server machines consume about 60%-70% power of their maximum power in the idle state
[25][20]. Server consolidation mechanisms are used to consolidate the workloads on a lesser number of machines, and
unused resources can be switched to a low-power mode, e.g., using DVFS [26][22] or can be turned off to save energy.
Various energy-saving approaches reduce the performance of the system and create a complex balance between power
savings and high performance. It shows the overload and under-utilization of resources against the typical resource
capacity of a data center. Some of the key challenges due to inefﬁcient distribution of physical resources at the data
center are excess power consumption, resource wastage, performance degradation, frequent VM migration, increased
SLA violations, and minimized QoS. To overcome these issues, the data centers must have ideal resource constraint
capacity in order to satisfy the incoming loads without wasting resources. Again, the resource manager can achieve
this if the accurate forecasting of future demand is known beforehand. This emphasizes the requirement for automatic
resource management strategies that allows systems to auto-adapt based on variable resource demands by efﬁciently
using the current resources.

3 Related Work

Multi-objective energy efﬁcient VMP
Sharma et al. [34] proposed an energy-efﬁcient multi-objective VMP framework to minimize power consumption,
maximize resource utilization and reduce SLA violation. The integration of genetic algorithm (GA) and particle swarm
optimization (PSO) termed the HGAPSO algorithm was used to assign VMs on PMs. The migration of VMs from
inefﬁcient to the optimal PM is accomplished by GA however, it has poor convergence. So, PSO assists GA in choosing
the most optimal PM within data center. The drawback of this approach is it is not applicable in a heterogeneous
environment.

Secure and Energy Aware Load Balancing (SEA-LB)
Singh et al. [35] suggested a secure and energy aware load balancing (SEA-LB) scheme for VMP problem. This
approach use GA to improve resource utilization, minimize power consumption and decreasing number of conﬂicting
server by providing security to each VM within the data center during VMP. The lack of this scheme is that it generally
leads to untimely convergence.

Secure and Multi-objective VM Placement
Saxena et al. [30] introduced a Secure and Multi-objective Virtual Machine Placement (SM-VMP) mechanism based
on NSGA-II and whale optimization evolutionary technique. This work focused on reduction in security threats, energy
consumption, communication cost and enhanced resource utilization simultaneously. A probability based encoding
and decoding scheme was suggested to encode VM allocations as a whale position vector. To check the efﬁcacy of
this approach, the obtained outcomes are compared with various existing multi-objective VMPs such as HGAPSO,
Non-dominated based GA (NSGA-II), Random-ﬁt, First-ﬁt and Best-ﬁt.

Multi-objective Load Balancing
Saxena et al.[33] introduced a multi-objective load-balancing (OP-MLB) technique. It is a power-efﬁcient and online
resource prediction based approach. Evolutionary neural-network used to predict future demands of VMs. Proactive
under/over-load identiﬁcation on PMs is carried out and NSGA-II algorithm is used for VM placement. An energy and
network efﬁcient VM migration technique was used to reduce power consumption within the data center. It permits
energy saving by switching off the idle PMs and decreasing the number of active PMs, minimizing VM migrations and
improving the resource utilization.

Multi-input and Multi-output Neural Network
Saxena et al. [32] proposed a multi-resource feed-forward evolutionary neural network based prediction technique by
applying modiﬁcations of an existing single input and single output (SISO) feed-forward neural network. To collect

4

Efﬁcient Resource Management in Cloud Environment

A PREPRINT

multiple inputs and predict output based on multiple attributes there are sets of neural nodes in stead of conventional
nodes at input, hidden and output layers. This approach enhanced prediction accuracy with nominal requirement of
time complexity and space complexity as compared to SISO neural networks. This incorporated technique optimized
resource utilization and energy consumption of the data center.

Quantum Neural Network
Singh et al. [36] suggested a resource prediction model for cloud environment. This work uses Evolutionary Quantum
Neural Network (EQNN) which is the combination of precise concepts of quantum computing and evolutionary
algorithm. Quantum gates such as rotation gates and C-NOT gates are used as an activation function inside the neural
network. During training phase, there is a assumption that qubits have superior exploration and exploitation capacity
than actual numbers. Qubits are generated from pre-processed training input data with the help of rotation gate. Then,
qubit values are generated for network connections instead of real-numbered weights.

Evolutionary Neural Network
A workload prediction model suggested by Kumar et al.[29] for cloud environment by applying neural network and self
adaptive differential evolution (SaDE) algorithm. This approach deals with collection of historical data from various
cloud users then pre-processing over these data is conducted by normalizing it in the range of [0, 1]. Here, prediction
model predict future workload on data center at n + 1 time instance by extracting patterns from actual workload and
analysing of n previous workload values. Then, SaDE algorithm is applied to train the neural network. The more
accurate results are obtained due to fast convergence, higher exploration, and learning capability of the SaDE algorithm.

Kumar et al. [28] proposed a workload prediction approach that is based on neural network model with supervised
learning mechanism. A biphase adaptive differential evolution (BaDE) learning algorithm used to train the neural
network which motivated by dual adaptation such as, at crossover level during exploitation process and mutation in
exploration phase to enhance the performance of neural network. This technique provided better prediction accuracy.

Long Short-term Recurrent Neural Network (LSTM-RNN)
Long short-term memory model in a recurrent neural network (LSTM-RNN) proposed by Kumar et al.[27] for load
prediction of ﬁne-grained host. This model use the Back-propagation algorithm between recurrent layers and obtains
better prediction accuracy for server loads. The major drawback of this approach is that, during the training phase it
takes long computational time.

Communication Cost Aware Resource Efﬁcient Load Balancing
Saxena et al. [31] proposed a communication cost aware and resource efﬁcient load balancing (CARELB) scheme to
minimize communication cost among VMs, reduce power consumption and improve resource utilization of the data
center. VMs are assigned with high afﬁnity and inter-dependency physically nearer to each other. In order to obtain op-
timal VM allocations a combined concept of Particle Swarm Optimization and NSGA-II i.e. PSOGA algorithm was used.

Complex-Valued Neural Network
Qazi et al. [37] proposed a multi-layered neural networks with multi-valued neurons (MLMVN) prediction model.
A complex-valued neural network with a derivative-free feed-forward learning was used by this approach. Since,
complex-valued neural network is more efﬁcient than traditional real-valued based neural network. It allows high
learning capability and better accuracy in minimum time.

Multi objective VM placement
A workload prediction and allocation technique suggested in [38]. It is a multi-objective allocation approach that deal
with memory and CPU utilization of VMs and PMs ensures minimum power usage within the data center. The GA
was used to predict future resource usage before assigning VMs to PMs. After that VMP algorithm was employed to
enhance resource utilization and minimize power consumption.

4 Emerging Challenges and Future Research Directions

In the light of current resource management mechanisms, the subsequent issues are summarized for the improvement
and advancement of more promising resource management framework in cloud environment:

5

Efﬁcient Resource Management in Cloud Environment

A PREPRINT

Table 1: Comparative Summary

Author, Objective
Sharma et al., 2016
[34], Multi-objective
VM placement

Singh et al., 2019
[35], Multi-objective
VM placement
Saxena et al., 2021
[30], Multi-objective
VM placement

Saxena et al., 2021
[33], online predic-
tive resource manage-
ment

Saxena et al., 2021
[32], VM auto scaling

Singh et al.
,2021
[36], workload pre-
diction model

Kumar et al., 2018
[29], workload pre-
diction model

Kumar et al., 2018
[27], workload pre-
diction model

kumar et al., 2020
[28]

Approach
Hybrid of PSO and
GA algorithm

NSGA-II

Whale
Optimiza-
tion Algorithm and
NSGA-II

multi-objective VM
placement based on
Online VM resource-
usage using evolu-
tionary optimization
mechanisms
Workload prediction
and clustering tech-
nique is used to get
accurate number and
size of VMs
Quantum based evo-
lutionary neural net-
work optimized by
Self-balanced adap-
tive differential evolu-
tionary algorithm

Artiﬁcial
Neural
Network trained with
SaDE evolutionary
algorithm
Long
short-term
memory model in a
recurrent neural net-
work (LSTM-RNN)
Bi-phase adaptive dif-
ferential evolution al-
gorithm used to opti-
mize neural network

Strength
Maximizes resource
utilization and min-
imizes power con-
sumption
Consideration of se-
curity during load bal-
ancing
Maximize
resource
utilization, minimize
energy consumption,
communication cost
and security
Energy-efﬁcient VM
placement with proac-
tive handling of over-
load

Energy efﬁcient VM
placement

Higher and stable pre-
diction accuracy

enhanced
predic-
tion accuracy over
Back-propagation
algorithm
better accuracy than
ANN

Faster Convergence

al.,
[31],

et

Saxena
2020
Communication-
cost
placement

aware VM

Integration of PSO
and NSGA-II algo-
rithm (PSOGA)

resource
enhances
utilization and mini-
mizes response-time

6

Weakness
Resource
wastage

VM migration
is not consid-
ered
Cluster
level
VM mapping
is not consid-
ered

inaccurate
overload
prediction
may lead to
unnecessary
VM migration
under-loaded
servers
are
ignored

Higher
complexity
because
generation
and
cessing
qubits
Static
proach
prediction

of

pro-
of

ap-
for

Long Compu-
tational time

Higher
complexity
SaDE
than
algorithm op-
timized neural
network
VM mapping
at cluster-level
is not consid-
ered

Efﬁcient Resource Management in Cloud Environment

A PREPRINT

1. Enhancing accuracy of Resource prediction Model : In order to avoid SLA violations and permit contention
free execution of user task, it is necessary to improve the VM resource prediction accuracy. The accurate
prediction of future resource requirement provides reliable and highly available services to cloud users. Most
of the existing techniques are static and deals with ancient workload only.

2. Overloading and overall Performance Degradation: In overload condition, the collective resource demand
of VMs exceeds the available resource capacity of the PMs leading to overloaded PMs. It results overall
performance degradation and SLA violations such as, unavailability of resources, longer response time, some
VMs may crash etc.

3. Live migration of VMs and Downtime: To handle the variable user demands and arbitrary requirement of
excess resource capacities or to handle overload situations, VMs are switched from overloaded PMs to most
optimal PM which has ample resource capacity that leads to delayed execution. Another primary challenge is
to decide which VM should migrate, when to migrate, and to which PM it should migrate?

4. Lack of security during resource allocation: Security is the major concern of every cloud user. Resource
management policies must ensure the distribution of physical resources among various users’ VMs must
consider the security of data as a principal perspective along with capacity constraint of resources.

5. Consideration of single resource during load balancing: Most of the current elastic resource distribution
strategies deals with single resource such as CPU only, whereas all the resources are signiﬁcant as contention
of either of the resources i.e., memory, bandwidth, disk usage, processor may become bottleneck degrading
overall performance of the system in real world cloud resource management.

6. Interaction and Co-operation among associated operations: Separate consideration ofresource prediction,
resource provisioning, VM placement and VM migration, nevertheless all of these operations provides common
objective of energy-efﬁcient resource utilization. Therefore, all the related resource management operations
must be employed at homogeneous platform to permit interaction among them for advancement of a realistic
resource management solution in cloud environment.

The subsequent research guidelines are designed which will ﬁll the research gaps and deal with aforesaid challenges:

1. An enhanced resource prediction technique with maximum accuracy is required to be developed. The resource
predictor should analyze dynamically in real-time by training and re-training itself with ancient data along
with real-time resource usage by distinct VMs and PMs. Additionally, multiple resources must be expected
simultaneously by analyzing utilization of various resources from the training data samples.

2. An efﬁcient over/under-load forecasting technique is necessary which can primitively compute the high and
down load situation with maximum accuracy that can allow migration of VMs before occurrence of the
under/over-load and reduce performance degradation.

3. To optimize multiple resources usage such as memory, CPU, bandwidth simultaneously throughout load
balancing for contention-free execution of users’ task while preserving power, decreasing resource wastage,
minimizing carbon emission in cloud data center.

4. To develop a secure resource distribution schemes for cloud environment which permits secure execution of

users task, secure inter communication between interdependent VMs.

5. To develop a reliable fault tolerant framework to enhance the resource utilization and meet QoS parameter.

6. To incorporate workload prediction technique with an efﬁcient load balancing approach at systematic platform

to improve the effectiveness during resource management.

References

[1] Kumar, Jitendra, and Ashutosh Kumar Singh. "Dynamic resource scaling in cloud using neural network and black
hole algorithm." In 2016 Fifth International Conference on Eco-friendly Computing and Communication Systems
(ICECCS), pp. 63-67. IEEE, 2016.

[2] Kumar, Jitendra, and Ashutosh Kumar Singh. "Cloud datacenter workload estimation using error preventive time

series forecasting models." Cluster Computing 23, no. 2 (2020): 1363-1379.

[3] Gupta, Ishu, Rishabh Gupta, Ashutosh Kumar Singh, and Rajkumar Buyya. "MLPAM: A machine learning and
probabilistic analysis based model for preserving security and privacy in cloud environment." IEEE Systems
Journal 15, no. 3 (2020): 4248-4259.

7

Efﬁcient Resource Management in Cloud Environment

A PREPRINT

[4] Gupta, Rishabh, and Ashutosh Kumar Singh. "Differential and Access Policy Based Privacy-Preserving Model in

Cloud Environment." Journal of Web Engineering (2022): 609-632.

[5] Gupta, R. and Singh, A.K., 2022, March. Privacy-Preserving Cloud Data Model based on Differential Approach.
In 2022 Second International Conference on Power, Control and Computing Technologies (ICPC2T) (pp. 1-6).
IEEE.

[6] Chhabra, Sakshi, and Ashutosh Kumar Singh. "Dynamic Resource Allocation Method for Load Balance Schedul-

ing Over Cloud Data Center Networks." Journal of Web Engineering (2021): 2269-2284.

[7] Chhabra, Sakshi, and Ashutosh Kumar Singh. "A secure VM allocation scheme to preserve against co-resident

threat." International Journal of Web Engineering and Technology 15, no. 1 (2020): 96-115

[8] Kumar, Jitendra, Ashutosh Kumar Singh, and Anand Mohan. "Resource-efﬁcient load-balancing framework for

cloud data center networks." ETRI Journal 43, no. 1 (2021): 53-63.

[9] Gupta, Rishabh, Deepika Saxena, and Ashutosh Kumar Singh. "Data security and privacy in cloud computing:

concepts and emerging trends." arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.09508 (2021).

[10] Chhabra, S., and A. K. Singh. "Dynamic hierarchical load balancing model for cloud data centre networks." Elec-

tronics Letters 55, no. 2 (2019): 94-96.

[11] Chhabra, Sakshi, and Ashutosh Kumar Singh. "OPH-LB: Optimal Physical Host for Load Balancing in Cloud

Environment." Pertanika Journal of Science & Technology 26, no. 3 (2018).

[12] Singh, Ashutosh Kumar, and Rishabh Gupta. "A privacy-preserving model based on differential approach for

sensitive data in cloud environment." Multimedia Tools and Applications (2022): 1-24.

[13] Chhabra, Sakshi, and Ashutosh Kumar Singh. "Optimal VM placement model for load balancing in cloud data
centers." In 2019 7th International Conference on Smart Computing & Communications (ICSCC), pp. 1-5. IEEE,
2019.

[14] Kumar, Jitendra, and Ashutosh Kumar Singh. "Cloud resource demand prediction using differential evolution
based learning." In 2019 7th International Conference on Smart Computing & Communications (ICSCC), pp. 1-5.
IEEE, 2019.

[15] Kumar, Jitendra, and Ashutosh Kumar Singh. "Performance assessment of time series forecasting models for cloud

datacenter networks’ workload prediction." Wireless Personal Communications 116, no. 3 (2021): 1949-1969.

[16] Saxena, Deepika, and Ashutosh Kumar Singh. "VM Failure Prediction based Intelligent Resource Management
Model for Cloud Environments." In 2022 Second International Conference on Power, Control and Computing
Technologies (ICPC2T), pp. 1-6. IEEE, 2022.

[17] Kumar, Jitendra, and Ashutosh Kumar Singh. "Adaptive Learning based Prediction Framework for Cloud
Datacenter Networks’ Workload Anticipation." Journal of Information Science & Engineering 36, no. 5 (2020).

[18] Saxena, Deepika, and A. K. Singh. "Security embedded dynamic resource allocation model for cloud data

centre." Electronics Letters 56, no. 20 (2020): 1062-1065.

[19] Saxena, Deepika, and Ashutosh Kumar Singh. "Auto-adaptive learning-based workload forecasting in dynamic

cloud environment." International Journal of Computers and Applications (2020): 1-11.

[20] Saxena, Deepika, and Ashutosh Kumar Singh. "OSC-MC: Online secure communication model for cloud

environment." IEEE Communications Letters 25, no. 9 (2021): 2844-2848.

[21] Saxena, Deepika, and Ashutosh Kumar Singh. "Energy aware resource efﬁcient-(eare) server consolidation
framework for cloud datacenter." In Advances in communication and computational technology, pp. 1455-1464.
Springer, Singapore, 2021.

[22] Saxena, Deepika, and Ashutosh Kumar Singh. "OFP-TM: an online VM failure prediction and tolerance model
towards high availability of cloud computing environments." The Journal of Supercomputing 78, no. 6 (2022):
8003-8024.

[23] Saxena, Deepika, Ishu Gupta, Ashutosh Kumar Singh, and Chung-Nan Lee. "A Fault Tolerant Elastic Resource
Management Framework Towards High Availability of Cloud Services." IEEE Transactions on Network and
Service Management (2022).

[24] Eugen Feller, Louis Rilling, and Christine Morin. Energy-aware ant colony based workload placement in clouds.

In 2011 IEEE/ACM 12th International Conference on Grid Computing, pages 26–33. IEEE, 2011.

8

Efﬁcient Resource Management in Cloud Environment

A PREPRINT

[25] Neha Garg, Damanpreet Singh, and Major Singh Goraya. Power and resource-aware vm placement in cloud
environment. In 2018 IEEE 8th International Advance Computing Conference (IACC), pages 113–118. IEEE,
2018.

[26] Li Shang, Li-Shiuan Peh, and Niraj K Jha. Dynamic voltage scaling with links for power optimization of
interconnec- tion networks. In The Ninth International Symposium on High-Performance Computer Architecture,
2003. HPCA-9 2003. Proceedings., pages 91–102. IEEE, 2003.

[27] Jitendra Kumar, Rimsha Goomer, and Ashutosh Kumar Singh. Long short term memory recurrent neural network
(lstm-rnn) based workload forecasting model for cloud datacenters. Procedia Computer Science, 125:676–682,
2018.

[28] Jitendra Kumar, Deepika Saxena, Ashutosh Kumar Singh, and Anand Mohan. Biphase adaptive learning-based
neural network model for cloud datacenter workload forecasting. Soft Computing, 24(19):14593–14610, 2020.

[29] Jitendra Kumar and Ashutosh Kumar Singh. Workload prediction in cloud using artiﬁcial neural network and

adaptive differential evolution. Future Generation Computer Systems, 81:41–52, 2018.

[30] Deepika Saxena, Ishu Gupta, Jitendra Kumar, Ashutosh Kumar Singh, and Xiaoqing Wen. A secure and multiob-

jective virtual machine placement framework for cloud data center. IEEE Systems Journal, 2021.

[31] Deepika Saxena and Ashutosh Kumar Singh. Communication cost aware resource efﬁcient load balancing (care-lb)

framework for cloud datacenter. Recent Advances in Computer Science and Communications, 12:1–00, 2020.

[32] Deepika Saxena and Ashutosh Kumar Singh. A proactive autoscaling and energy-efﬁcient vm allocation framework

using online multi-resource neural network for cloud data center. Neurocomputing, 426:248–264, 2021.

[33] Deepika Saxena, Ashutosh Kumar Singh, and Rajkumar Buyya. Op-mlb: An online vm prediction based multi-
objective load balancing framework for resource management at cloud datacenter. IEEE Transactions on Cloud
Computing, 2021.

[34] Neeraj Kumar Sharma and G Ram Mohana Reddy. Multi-objective energy efﬁcient virtual machines allocation at

the cloud data center. IEEE Transactions on Services Computing, 12(1):158–171, 2016.

[35] Ashutosh Kumar Singh and Jitendra Kumar. Secure and energy aware load balancing framework for cloud data

centre networks. Electronics Letters, 55(9):540–541, 2019.

[36] Ashutosh Kumar Singh, Deepika Saxena, Jitendra Kumar, and Vrinda Gupta. A quantum approach towards the
adaptive prediction of cloud workloads. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, 32(12):2893–
2905, 2021.

[37] Kashifuddin Qazi and Igor Aizenberg. Cloud datacenter workload prediction using complex-valued neural
networks. In 2018 IEEE Second International Conference on Data Stream Mining & Processing (DSMP), pages
315–321. IEEE, 2018.

[38] Fan-Hsun Tseng, Xiaofei Wang, Li-Der Chou, Han-Chieh Chao, and Victor CM Leung. Dynamic resource
prediction and allocation for cloud data center using the multiobjective genetic algorithm. IEEE Systems Journal,
12(2):1688– 1699, 2017.

9

