An Industrial Applicable Approach towards Design Optimization of a
Mechanism: a Coronaventilator Case Study.

Abdelmajid Ben Yahya1,2,∗, Nick Van Oosterwyck1,2, Jan Herregodts3, Stijn Herregodts3, Simon Houwen4,5,
Bart Vanwalleghem4,5, Stijn Derammelaere1,2

2
2
0
2

l
u
J

9
2

]

Y
S
.
s
s
e
e
[

1
v
7
3
5
4
1
.
7
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—
Design optimization of mechanisms is a promising research
area as it results in more energy-efﬁcient machines without
compromising performance. However, machine builders do not
actually use the potential described in the literature as these
methods require too much theoretical analysis.

This paper introduces a convenient optimization workﬂow
allowing wide industrial adoption, by using CAD models. The 3D
multi-body software is used to perform motion simulations, from
which the objective value samples can be extracted. These motion
simulations determine the required torque for a certain combi-
nation of design parameters to fulﬁll the movement. Dedicated
software can execute multiple motion simulations sequentially
and interchange data between the different simulations, which
automates the process of retrieving objective value samples.
Therefore, without in-depth analytical design analysis, a machine
designer can evaluate multiple designs at low cost. Moreover,
by implementing an optimization algorithm, an optimal design
can be found that meets the objective. In a case study of a
coronaventilator mechanism with three design parameters (DP’s),
39 CAD motion simulations allowed to reduce the RMS torque
of the mechanism by 57.2% in 42 minutes.

I. INTRODUCTION

The energy consumption of industrial machinery is a topic
of primary importance due to environmental and economic
considerations [1]. The 45% share that electric motors have in
the global electric consumption [2] supports the statement that
any energy-saving method should be investigated thoroughly.
The methodology proposed within this paper is applicable
for all mechanisms with an imposed movement of the end-
effector or tooltip. Many recent studies [3] pay attention to
minimizing the energy dissipation in the electric motor to
reduce the consumed electrical energy. Moreover, reducing
the energy losses in the motor lowers the probability that the
motor can be overheated [4]. The link lengths in a mechanism
can differ while fulﬁlling the same task, being the Point-To-
Point (PTP) displacement of the end-effector. Therefore, within
this case the geometry parameters |OA|, |AB|, and |BC| of the

1Department of Electromechanics, CoSysLab, University of Antwerp,

Antwerp, Belgium

2AnSyMo/CoSys, Flanders Make,

the strategic research centre for the

manufacturing industry, Belgium

3Department of Human Structure and Repair, Ghent University, Gent,

Belgium

4Department of Electrical Energy, Metals, Mechanical Constructions and

Systems, Ghent University Campus Kortrijk, Kortrijk, Belgium

5EEDT-MP, Flanders Make, the strategic research centre for the manufac-

turing industry, Belgium

∗Corresponding author: abdelmajid.benyahya@uantwerpen.be

coronaventilator depicted in Fig. 1 can be considered as design
parameters to enhance the mechanism, while maintaining the
imposed movement of the indentor. Design optimization of a
PTP mechanism is one speciﬁc approach to reduce the energy
consumption of electric machinery. As indicated in Fig. 2,
changing the geometry parameters (|OA|, |AB| and |BC|) can
result in a lower RMS torque (TRMS). The literature states that
minimizing the TRMS corresponds with reducing the energy
losses in the system [5]. Awareness about the inﬂuence of
machine components geometry on energy consumption has
recently attracted attention [3], [6], [7]. Mechanism models [4],
[8] replace the prototyping, allowing computational evaluation
of multiple designs with limited cost.

A coronaventilator is used as a proof of concept within this
study. This mechanism was constructed during the ﬁrst wave
of the covid-19 pandemic by a non-proﬁt organization [9].
Having continuous (24/7) electricity access is not obvious in
low- and middle-income countries. Thus, having a mechanism
that consumes a minimum of electric energy enabling the
usage of batteries is highly relevant. Therefore, the objective
of this study is to ﬁnd the optimal design (being lengths |OA|,
|AB| and |BC| in Fig. 1) leading to a minimal TRMS for this
PTP mechanism. As of now, the industry heavily relies on
3D multi-body software to design a mechanism. The method
introduced in this paper uses these CAD models to sample
the objective value through motion simulations. Furthermore,
multiple motion simulations must be set up in a speciﬁc order
and interchange information to have the correct objective value
for a combination of design parameters |OA|, |AB|, and |BC|.
The automation of the process in which multiple simulations

Fig. 1.
coronaventilator, in the present paper.

The considered design parameters |OA|,

|AB| and |BC| of a

XδeXθOIndentorABC 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2. Deﬁning speciﬁc lengths for the mechanism links inﬂuences the required speed and torque to move the end-effector (red beam) over a range of ∆δ ,
driven from point O.

are run sequentially is performed by dedicated software [10].
State-of-the-art design optimization methods derive the torque
for a mechanism’s movement analytically [11], which is mech-
anism speciﬁc and less convenient. However, the methodology
described in this paper only needs CAD software, which
ensures broad industrial applicability.

A. Related Work

In the literature [12], the minimization of the driving torque
is done by establishing dynamic equations of the system to
predict the dynamics. Moreover, [11]–[13] do not deﬁne the
feasible search domain nor include it in searching for the
optimal result. Indicating the feasibility of a certain design
is important as defects, giving infeasible designs, [14] can
occur in the synthesis of a mechanism. The optimization
algorithms of [11], [12], [15] assure that the objective function
has converged towards a minimum, yet it is generally not guar-
anteed that the designed linkage will be feasible. Therefore, the
necessary analysis should be added so that the optimal solution
can fulﬁll the movement without issues.

Developing a reciprocal mechanism that follows the desired
end-effector trajectory is a classical design problem that re-
searchers extensively explore [16]. However, all methods in
the literature [11]–[16] use dynamic equations, which are case
speciﬁc and inconvenient for industrial applicability. Therefore,
this paper aims to describe a workﬂow on optimizing a mech-
anism through the usage of motion simulations and dedicated
software that automates this methodology.

B. Method

This paper describes the methodology one should apply
to optimize a mechanism through CAD-based motion sim-
ulations. Mechanical design of systems is mainly done in
Computer-Aided Design (CAD) software. These CAD models
include all required information (i.e., volume, mass, friction,
damping, joints,...) to model the dynamics of a mechanism.
This information is necessary to calculate the required torque

of the mechanism through motion simulations. By driving the
mechanism with the motion proﬁle θ (t) at point O (Fig. 1),
being the axis driven by a motor, the user can extract the
necessary torque from the software (as in Fig. 2) to fulﬁll the
prescribed movement δ (t) of the end-effector. The objective
value is the TRMS, necessary to drive the mechanism fulﬁlling
an imposed PTP motion (δ (t)).

Hence, by calculating the TRMS based on CAD simulations
as elucidated in Section II, the objective value for a particular
design (i.e., speciﬁc values for the three design parameters
|OA|, |AB|, and |BC|) is obtained. Be aware that changing
the geometric parameters (|OA|, |AB|, and |BC|) inﬂuences
the start- and end angle of the motor θ as the imposed
end-effector movement δ (t) may not change. Therefore, a
kinematic transformation is necessary to derive the motor
proﬁle θ (t) for a speciﬁc movement of the end-effector δ (t).
However, performing a kinematic transformation for a design
parameter combination (|OA|, |AB|, and |BC|) that results in an
infeasible design is irrelevant. Thus, all designs have to pass a
feasibility check before any calculations are performed on the
design. After obtaining the motion proﬁle of the motor (θ (t)),
for a speciﬁc feasible design parameter combination, it can be
used as a driver of the mechanism in simulation to perform a
dynamic analysis and derive the required torque proﬁle. The
whole process described above is a sequence of motion simula-
tions that is automated in order to obtain the objective value for
different feasible design parameter combinations (|OA|, |AB|
and |BC|). As the objective value TRMS for a certain design of
the mechanism can be derived, an optimization algorithm can
be used, as discussed in section III. This algorithm is necessary
to minimize the TRMS and thus optimize the mechanism. After
optimization, optimal combination of the design parameters
|OA|, |AB|, and |BC| is obtained that has a minimal TRMS, and
therefore consumes a minimal amount of energy, as shown by
results in section IV.

Design 1Design 2AOBCAOBC∆δ∆δFig. 3. The end-effector (indentor) requires a movement from δi to δe, which is performed by moving θ over a design-speciﬁc angle.

Fig. 4. The workﬂow for automated extraction of the necessary driving torque for different feasible mechanism designs. One can optimize the mechanism
using an algorithm that chooses the design parameter combinations of what the objective value must be determined.

II. CAD MOTION SIMULATIONS

The validation case is clariﬁed to make all the following
more tangible. This mechanism, shown in Fig. 3, can ventilate
a patient by pressing the indentor into the bag, which causes
airﬂow towards the patient. The movement of the end-effector
(indentor) from a starting angle δi towards an end angle δe is
caused by moving point O over θ (t). In this paper, the machine
designer only deﬁned an end-effector (indentor) motion proﬁle
δ (t), resulting in a reciprocal movement between the positions
δi and δe.

Fig. 3 presents the CAD model of the coronaventilator and
illustrates that the red beam, connected with the indentor (i.e.,
the end-effector), moves by rotating input link OA around

point O. This is the point where an electric motor drives the
mechanism. The red beam has two predeﬁned angles: an angle
δe that holds the mechanism in a position where the indentor
touches the bag and an angle δi that corresponds to a position
in which the air is compressed out of the bag. Within these
CAD models, the design parameters |OA|, |AB|, and |BC| of
the coronaventilator can be parameterized to simulate different
designs with different corresponding torque proﬁles, as shown
in Fig. 2.

A CAD motion simulation [17] can determine the necessary
torque to drive the mechanism at point O only if the required
position proﬁle θ (t), at that point O, is known. However, the
user solely deﬁnes the required motion proﬁle of the end-

XδeXθOIndentorABCXδiOBagBeamBCAMotion simulation 2δ(t)δ₁δ₂θ(t)θ₁θ₂tθΔt₁Δθθ₁θ₂transfer-ﬁle-...tTΔt₁Torque proﬁleT(t)θ(t)θ₂θ₁Motion simulation 3OKNOKMotion simulation 1ADADCBCDBCRange of motioncheck for given DP ...Motion simulation 2δ(t)δ₁δ₂θ(t)θ₁θ₂tθΔt₁Δθθ₁θ₂transfer-ﬁle-3tTΔt₁Torque proﬁleT(t)θ(t)θ₂θ₁Motion simulation 3OKNOKMotion simulation 1ADADCBCDBCRange of motioncheck for given DP IIIMotion simulation 2δ(t)δ₁δ₂θ(t)θ₁θ₂tθΔt₁Δθθ₁θ₂transfer-ﬁle-2tTΔt₁Torque proﬁleT(t)θ(t)θ₂θ₁Motion simulation 3OKNOKMotion simulation 1ADADCBCDBCRange of motioncheck for given DP IIMotion simulation 2δ(t)δeδiθ(t)θeθitθ∆t₁∆θθeθitransfer-ﬁle-1tT∆t₁Torque proﬁleT(t)θ(t)θiθeMotion simulation 3OKNOKMotion simulation 1BC₁CBAOAB₁OA₁Requirements check for given DP’s IOUTPUT|BC||AB|OBJECTIVE = Trms|OA|IIIIIIHighLowINPUTtδ∆t₁∆δδeδiMOTION PROFILE (end eﬀector)DESIGN PARAMETERSBC = MINMAXAB= MINMAXOA = MINMAXCONCEPTBCABOAMINMAXIII...III< >effector, in this case, δ (t). Thus, a machine designer should
determine the speciﬁc motor angles θ (t) to move the end-
effector through the imposed motion proﬁle δ (t). It should
be noted that the kinematic transformation from δ (t) to θ (t)
depends on the chosen design parameter combination |OA|,
|AB|, and |BC|. Moreover, each evaluated design must be
feasible to extract a representative objective value. Therefore,
each selected design parameter combination (|OA|, |AB| and
|BC|) is analyzed by a sequence of three motion simulations
that are executed automatically, as indicated in Fig. 4.

A. Motion Simulation 1: Feasibility Check

As a ﬁrst step within the series of motion simulations, each
combination of design parameters (|OA|, |AB| and |BC|) should
be checked on feasibility. As depicted in Fig. 5 (left), a design
parameter combination can result in an infeasible mechanism
in which the link OA’ cannot be connected with the link A”B
at the highest position of its range of motion. Additionally,
Fig. 5 (right) shows an infeasible design wherein the end-
effector cannot reach the lowest desired position. Thus, a ﬁrst
simulation is required to check the assemblability of each new
mechanism over the required range of motion.

The ﬁrst motion simulation drives the CAD model from
point C, the end-effector see Fig. 5, over the desired range
of motion. The output of this simulation is either false or
true, which means that the simulated design is respectively in-
feasible or feasible. Infeasible design parameter combinations
are neglected and neither used in the following simulations,
nor by an algorithm to choose a better design, as shown in
Fig. 4. A speciﬁc range of motion can be a machine designer
requirement for the machine, as it is in this case. The indentor
has to move further up, so there is enough clearance to remove
or place the bag. As shown in Fig. 6, the range of motion
is 2 degrees bigger than the actual δ (t) movement. However,
when the range of motion is not explicitly desired the ﬁrst
simulation is removed, as the second simulation can give the
same outcome.

B. Motion Simulation 2: Kinematic Transformation

The feasible design is provided to the second motion simu-
lation. As indicated in Fig. 4, each design needs the complete
motor’s motion proﬁle θ (t), to move the end-effector according
to the imposed motion proﬁle δ (t). This step is crucial as

Fig. 5. On the left, a coronaventilator design that cannot be assembled in the
highest desired position of the complete range of motion. Another combination
of design parameters results in a mechanism that cannot complete the desired
range of motion, on the right.

Fig. 6.
motion and the movement δ (t) to improve the ease of use.

The machine designer requires a difference between the range of

each design parameter combination requires another motion
proﬁle θ (t) at the motor (point O) to preserve the same end-
effector movement. It is possible to calculate the motion proﬁle
θ (t) analytically. However, deriving the kinematic equations
is complex and can only be used for a particular mechanism.
For this reason, CAD motion simulation is used to perform
complex calculations instead of manual calculation by machine
builders. The CAD model
is driven from the end-effector
(point C) with the desired motion proﬁle δ (t). Because of the
kinematic transformation that the CAD software executes on
the mechanism, the user can extract the corresponding motor
proﬁle θ (t) for a speciﬁc design (Fig. 4). Subsequently, the
motor proﬁle is used in the next and last motion simulation.

C. Motion Simulation 3: Dynamic Analysis

As shown in Fig. 4,

the last simulation determines the
required driving torque of a speciﬁc design. The design that just
passed through the previous simulation and the design-speciﬁc
motor motion proﬁle is provided to this third simulation. The
CAD model drives the mechanism, as in real-life, from point O.
As a consequence of the dynamic analysis the CAD software
performs during such a simulation, one can extract the required
torque the motor should provide to drive a speciﬁc design
of the mechanism as desired. Based on the design-speciﬁc
torque proﬁle, the TRMS objective value for each design can
be calculated.

The complete sequential process with the three motion
simulations makes it possible to extract the objective value
for every feasible design. However,
this workﬂow has to
run automated to optimize a mechanism through algorithms.
Therefore, the present paper utilizes HEEDS MDO [10] as
commercial software to automate this workﬂow and has most
common optimizers integrated. As explained in section III,
algorithms are used to optimize the mechanism.

III. DESIGN OPTIMIZATION

An optimization algorithm uses the obtained objective value
for a speciﬁc design of the mechanism to create a new design
parameter combination, which possibly improves our objective
value and gets closer to the optimal design with a minimal
TRMS. Yet, notice that a design with a lower TRMS requires
a higher maximal speed of the motor, as shown in Fig. 7.

OA’CBA”COAtδ∆t₁∆δδeδirange ofmotion2°Fig. 7. A design with a lower TRMS demands a higher maximal speed from
the motor.

Fig. 8. Both algorithms require a different amount of design evaluations to
reach a minimal TRMS value. Moreover, the optimal objective value slightly
differs for both algorithms.

However, the increased motor speed stays within a realistic
range, thus giving it no further focus.

The optimization of the mechanism is an iterative method.
Therefore, automating the sequence of motion simulations is
a crucial step. The two most commonly used algorithms in
design optimization [14] are the Sequential Quadratic Program-
ming (SQP), and the Genetic Algorithm (GA). Therefore, a
comparative study is conducted between these two algorithms.
The different algorithms that search for the optimal design
parameter combination |OA|, |AB| and |BC| are SQP as a
gradi¨ent-based method and GA as a heuristic optimizer.

• Genetic algorithm: A GA is an adaptive heuristic search
method based on the evolution of genetics. The algorithm
starts with a population with a determined amount of
the designs in a generation are
random designs. All
evaluated and get a ﬁtness value, on which the next
generation is created through evolution principles such
as crossover, mutation, and selection. This evolutionary
algorithm iteratively evolves towards improved objective
values [18], [19].

• Sequential quadratic programming: The basic idea of
sequential quadratic programming is establishing an iter-
ative procedure where the search of the optimal solution
is led by the gradient of the quadratic model on the
objective function in every design parameter combination.
For each design, the objective function decreases fastest if
the following design goes in the direction of the negative
gradient of the objective function. The literature [20]
describes this algorithm as one of the most successful in
solving nonlinear constrained optimization problems.
Thus, adopting the algorithms above on our mechanism
will drive the process towards an optimal design parameter
combination (|OA|, |AB|, and |BC|) for the coronaventialtor.
The number of evaluations the algorithm performs must be
limited as the sequence of motion simulations can be very
time-consuming. However, taking the number of evaluations
too low can lead to a poor result of the algorithm. Therefore,
the algorithm can only stop when the objective value TRMS
converged to a minimum.

IV. RESULTS

The method described in sec. II is employed on the coro-
naventilator, which optimizes the mechanism by using an
algorithm that searches for a new design parameter combi-
nation (|OA|, |AB| and |BC|), as described in sec. III. The ﬁrst
algorithm used in the methodology is the Genetic Algorithm,
which found an optimal solution after 399 design evaluations,
as indicated in Fig. 8. Within these evaluations, the algorithm
chose some feasible and other infeasible designs. Each feasible
design requires, on average, 1 minute and 5 seconds, while an
infeasible design only takes 21 seconds. The time difference is
a consequence of the methodology in which infeasible designs
are detected in the ﬁrst simulation and not passed on to the
following simulation, as explained in sec. II. The genetic
algorithm evaluates 272 feasible and 127 infeasible designs,
giving a total of 399 designs (see Table I), to search for the
optimal design requiring a calculation time of 5 hours and 40
minutes.

By contrast,

the mechanism’s optimal design through a
gradient-based algorithm is found through a reasonable number
of 39 feasible design evaluations, requiring 42 minutes of
simulation time. It can be noticed that all designs chosen by
the SQP algorithm are feasible designs, which is a consequence
of our objective and the search method of the algorithm. The
algorithm starts in a feasible design parameter combination
(|OA|, |AB| and |BC|) and chooses the next design, with a small
increment, in the direction of the steepest negative gradient of
the objective function.

TABLE I

SAVING POTENTIAL ACHIEVED BY DESIGN OPTIMIZATION WITH
STATE-OF-THE-ART OPTIMIZATION ALGORITHMS.

Design

|OA|

|AB|

|BC|

Trms

Tmax

[mm]

[mm]

[mm]

[Nm]

[Nm]

Original

53

65

282

GA

SQP

82.68

141.25

281.8

30

76.22

271.75

7.91

3.13

3.39

13.26

5.43

5.16

Trms

Tmax

Number

savings

savings

o f

[%]

-

60.5

57.2

[%]

-

59.1

61.1

evaluations

-

399

39

39939[4] N. Van Oosterwyck, A. B. Yahya, A. Cuyt, and S. Derammelaere,
“CAD based trajectory optimization of PTP motions using chebyshev
polynomials,” in IEEE/ASME International Conference on Advanced
Intelligent Mechatronics, AIM, vol. 2020-July, 2020, pp. 403–408.
[5] G. Berselli, F. Balugani, M. Pellicciari, and M. Gadaleta, “Energy-
optimal motions for Servo-Systems: A comparison of spline interpolants
and performance indexes using a CAD-based approach,” Robotics and
Computer-Integrated Manufacturing, vol. 40, pp. 55–65, 2016.

[6] T. Mashimo, T. Urakubo, and T. Kanade, “Singularity-based four-bar
linkage mechanism for impulsive torque with high energy efﬁciency,”
Journal of Mechanisms and Robotics, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 1–8, 2015.
[7] P. Sheppard and S. Rahimifard, “Improving energy efﬁciency in manufac-
turing using peer benchmarking to inﬂuence machine design innovation,”
Clean Technologies and Environmental Policy, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 1213–
1235, 2019.

[8] N. V. Oosterwyck, F. Vanbecelaere, M. Haemers, D. Ceulemans,
K. Stockman, and S. Derammelaere, “CAD Enabled Trajectory opti-
mization and Accurate Motion Control for Repetitive Tasks.” in IEEE
International Conference on Control and Automation, ICCA, vol. 2019-
July.

IEEE, 2019, pp. 387–392.

[9] J. Herregodts and S. Herregodts, “Gear Up Medical,” 2019. [Online].

Available: https://www.coronaventilator.be/

[10] “HEEDS:
Available:
simcenter-heeds.html

Discover
[Online].
designs,
plm.automation.siemens.com/global/en/products/simcenter/

faster.”

better

[11] B. El-Kribi, A. Houidi, Z. Afﬁ, and L. Romdhane, “Application of multi-
objective genetic algorithms to the mechatronic design of a four bar
system with continuous and discrete variables,” Mechanism and Machine
Theory, vol. 61, pp. 68–83, 2013.

[12] Z. Afﬁ, B. El-kribi, and L. Romdhane, “Advanced mechatronic design
using a multi-objective genetic algorithm optimization of a motor-driven
four-bar system,” Mechatronics, vol. 17, pp. 489–500, 2007.

[13] R. Rayner, M. N. Sahinkaya, and B. Hicks, “Combining inverse dynamics
with traditional mechanism synthesis to improve the performance of high
speed machinery,” in 2008 Proceedings of the ASME Dynamic Systems
and Control Conference, DSCC 2008, 2009, pp. 393–400.

[14] A. Hern´andez, A. Mu˜noyerro, M. Ur´ızar, and E. Amezua, “Comprehen-
sive approach for the dimensional synthesis of a four-bar linkage based
on path assessment and reformulating the error function,” Mechanism
and Machine Theory, vol. 156, p. Hernander, 2021.

[15] G. R. Gogate and S. B. Matekar, “Optimum synthesis of motion gener-
ating four-bar mechanisms using alternate error functions,” Mechanism
and Machine Theory, vol. 54, pp. 41–61, 2012.

[16] J. A. Cabrera, A. Simon, and M. Prado, “Optimal synthesis of mecha-
nisms with genetic algorithms,” Mechanism and Machine Theory, vol. 37,
no. 10, pp. 1165–1177, 2002.

[17] “Simcenter 3D for motion simulation,” 2020.

[Online]. Available:

www.cardsplmsolutions.com/nl/producten/simcenter-3d

[18] U. Bodenhofer, Genetic Algorithms : Theory and Applications, 2nd ed.,

Linz-Hagenberg, 2004.

[19] M. Kumar, M. Husain, N. Upreti, and D. Gupta, “Genetic Algorithm:
Review and Application,” SSRN Electronic Journal, vol. 2, no. 2, pp.
451–454, 2020.

[20] P. T. Boggs and J. W. Tolle, “Sequential quadratic programming for large-
scale nonlinear optimization,” Journal of Computational and Applied
Mathematics, vol. 124, no. 1-2, pp. 123–137, 2000.

However, both algorithms lead to different optimal design
suggestions, which are better than the original design suggested
by a machine builder. The optimal objective value found with
the SQP algorithm is slightly higher than the solution obtained
with GA, as shown in Table I. Yet,
the contrast between
the two algorithms is noticeable in the required number of
design evaluations to ﬁnd an optimal design. In summary,
Table I shows that GA was able to reduce the TRMS by
60.5%, while SQP diminished the objective value by 57.2%.
The optimal design found through a gradient-based method
is quick, yet the obtained TRMS value strongly depend on the
combination of |OA|, |AB|, and |BC|, in which the algorithm
starts searching (i.e. starting point). This reveals that by using
the SQP algorithm a risk is taken of having an sub-optimal
design, which is a local optimum. In addition, both algorithms
were able to lower the maximal
torque the motor should
deliver during the mechanism’s movement, which means that
the mechanism can operate with a smaller, and thus cheaper
motor.

V. CONCLUSION

This study proposes a convenient and broad industrial ap-
plicable design optimization approach, in which CAD models
are used as a basis. The workﬂow requires multiple motion
simulations of the CAD model to extract the necessary torque
to drive the designed mechanism. The methodology described
in this paper does not demand any theoretical analysis of the
mechanism, making it general and applicable for any PTP
mechanism in the industry. The ﬁrst motion simulation checks
the feasibility of the proposed design parameter combination
(|OA|, |AB|, and |BC|). Then only the feasible designs are
passed to the second simulation, which performs the kinematic
transformation to derive the design-speciﬁc motor proﬁle for
an imposed end-effector movement. At last, the derived motor
proﬁle is used in the last motion simulation to perform dy-
namic analysis and extract the necessary torque to drive the
mechanism with the chosen design. The obtained objective
value (TRMS) from the torque proﬁle is used by the optimization
algorithm to choose an improved design, which is evaluated by
the sequence of motion simulations.

The results clearly show that the proposed method outper-
forms the arbitrary designs chosen by the machine builder and
reveals an energy-saving potential up to 60.5%. Moreover, the
choice of an algorithm signiﬁcantly inﬂuences the number of
designs evaluated to ﬁnd an optimal design for the mechanism.
The gradient-based algorithm only needed 39 design evalua-
tions, which beneﬁts the method’s applicability.

REFERENCES

[1] D. Dornfeld, Green manufacturing: Fundamentals and applications.

Springer US, 2013, vol. 9781441960.

[2] P. Waide and C. U. Brunner, “Energy-Efﬁciency Policy Opportunities for
Electric Motor-Driven Systems,” Internationale energy agency, vol. na,
no. na, p. 132, 2011.

[3] G. Carabin, E. Wehrle, and R. Vidoni, “A review on energy-saving
optimization methods for robotic and automatic systems,” Robotics,
vol. 6, no. 4, 2017.

