Blockchain-based Medical Image Sharing and 
Automated Critical-results Notification: A Novel 
Framework 

Jiyoun Randolph∗, Md Jobair Hossain Faruk†, Hossain Shahriar∗, Maria Valero∗ 
Liang Zhao∗, Nazmus Sakib∗, Bilash Saha∗ 

∗Department of Information Technology, Kennesaw State University, GA, USA 
†Department of Software Engineering and Game Development, Kennesaw State University, GA, USA  
{jrando18, mhossa21, bsaha}@students.kennesaw.edu  |  {hshahria, mvalero2, lzhao10, nsakib1}@kennesaw.edu 

including 

integration  between 

Abstract— In teleradiology, medical images are transmitted 
to offsite radiologist for interpretation and the dictation report 
is  sent  back  to  the  original  site  to  aid  timely  diagnosis  and 
proper  patient  care.  Although  teleradiology  offers  great 
benefits 
time  and  cost  efficiency,  after-hour 
coverages,  and  staffing  shortage  management,  there  are  some 
technical  and  operational  limitations  to  overcome  in  reaching 
its  full  potential.  We  analyzed  the  current  teleradiology 
workflow  to  identify  inefficiencies.  Image  unavailability  and 
delayed  critical  result  communication  stemmed  from  lack  of 
system 
teleradiology  practice  and 
healthcare institutions are among the most substantial factors 
causing prolonged turnaround time. In this paper, we propose 
a  blockchain-based  medical  image  sharing  and  automated 
critical-results  notification  platform  to  address  the  current 
limitation.  We  believe  the  proposed  platform  will  enhance 
efficiency 
for 
intermediaries and will benefit patients by eliminating the need 
for storing medical images in hard copies. While considerable 
progress  was  achieved,  further  research  on  governance  and 
HIPAA compliance is required to optimize the adoption of the 
new  application.  Towards  an  idea  to  a working  paradigm,  we 
will  implement  the  prototype  during  the  next  phase  of  our 
study. 

in  workflow  by  eliminating 

the  need 

Keywords—  Blockchain,  Hyperledger  Fabric,  Teleradiology, 
Medical  Image  Sharing,  Critical-Results  Notification,  Workflow 
Automation 

I.  INTRODUCTION  

the 

from  where 

studies  are  generated. 

Teleradiology is a branch of telemedicine [1]. It refers to 
a  practice  where  radiologists  interpret  radiological  studies 
offsite 
In 
teleradiology,  medical  images  are  transmitted  electronically 
to  offsite  radiologists  (teleradiologists)  and  dictation  reports 
are sent back to the original site to aid proper patient care [2]. 
time  and  cost 
Teleradiology  offers  great  benefits  of 
efficiency,  after-hours  coverages,  and  staffing  shortage 
management 
the  quality  of  patient  care, 
efficiency  of  the  healthcare  system,  and  productivity  of 
radiologists  [3].  It  is  widely  used  for  hospitals,  imaging 
centers, emergency facilities, and mobile x-ray services and 
commercial  radiology  outsourcing  enterprises  have  been 
emerging.  The  field's  growth  has  accelerated  with  massive 
growth in telehealth, especially during the recent COVID-19 
pandemic.  With  this  trend,  the  global  teleradiology  market 
size  was  estimated  to  be  $3.453  billion  in  2019  and  is 
expected to reach $8.024 billion by 2026 [4]. 

improve 

to 

Despite their apparent promise, there are some limitations 
in  reaching  the  full  potential  of  teleradiology.  Systems 
integration  has  been  one  of  the  main  challenges  as  image 
management system resides in the onsite information system 
security  domain  and  teleradiology  practice  has  its  own 
system 
[5].  Working  with  disparate  systems  causes 
challenges  in  medical  image  transmission  and  critical  result 
communication  between  teleradiology  practice  and  other 
health care institutions. In addition, teleradiologists often do 
not  have  direct  access  to  the  onsite  Radiology  Information 
System  (RIS)  or  Picture  Archiving  and  Communication 
System  (PACS),  instead,  use  web-based  image  distribution 
systems [3].  

image 

This can be problematic not only because the web-based 
image distribution systems offer limited functions compared 
to  those  used  by  onsite  radiologists  but  also  teleradiologists 
can  only  provide  provisional  reports  in  some  cases  due  to 
their  limited  access  to  patient  history  and  prior  exams  for 
comparison.  Furthermore,  current 
transmission 
operates  on  the  "demand-push"  model,  where  the  sending 
site  needs 
transmissions.  Hence, 
image 
teleradiologists  do  not  have  direct  access  to  additional  data 
such  as  prior  reports  if  those  reports  have  not  been  sent  by 
the  sending  site  and  must  request  additional  images  [3]. 
Lastly,  lack  of  effective  means  of  communication  between 
interpreting  radiologists  and  referring  physicians/care  teams 
can  affect  patient  outcomes  significantly  with  critical 
conditions  where  timely  treatment  can  drastically  improve 
survival rates and reduce complications.  

initiate 

to 

Identified challenges not only cause inefficiencies in the 
workflow but also are interruptions in radiologists' workflow. 
This paper will examine the current teleradiology workflow 
and  identify  inefficiencies  in  image  sharing  and  critical-
results  communication.  We  propose  a  blockchain-based 
model  for  image  sharing  and  critical-results  communication 
to address current limitations in teleradiology.  

The  remainder  of  the  paper  is  structured  as  follows: 
Section  II  provides  an  overview  of  previous  research  on 
healthcare blockchain applications and a brief introduction to 
Hyperledger  Fabric  followed  by  discusses  challenges  in  the 
current  teleradiology  workflow  in  Section  III.  Section  IV 
presents  a  proposed  architecture  for  a  blockchain-based 
medical 
image  sharing  and  automated  critical-results 
notification  application  while  Section  V  discusses  the 
advantages  and  limitations  of  the  proposed  application,  and 
Section VI concludes the paper. 

 
II.  RELATED WORK 

A.  Literature Review  

in 

industries,  especially 

Although  there  is  an  increasing  interest  in  blockchain 
technology  from  healthcare,  there  are  limited  use  cases  and 
research on the use of blockchain in healthcare compared to 
radiology.  Healthcare 
other 
blockchain applications are primarily at the conceptual stage, 
and  many  of  them  focus  on  managing  EHR  (Electronic 
Health Records) or medical research data. Scores of research 
work  have  been  conducted  in  healthcare  by  adopting 
blockchain 
chain 
that 
management in healthcare and patient-driven interoperability 
[6], [7]. 

technology 

includes 

supply 

A.  Azaria  et  el.  [8]  proposed  blockchain-based  medical 
data  access  and  permission  management  system,  MedRec. 
MedRec is the first to develop a fully functional blockchain 
prototype to address the challenges in current EHR systems 
such  as  data  fragmentation,  data  accessibility,  system 
interoperability,  patient  agency,  and  quality  and  quantity  of 
medical research data. Each node in the blockchain network 
only  stores  copies  of  authorization  data  while  medical 
records  are  stored  on  external  databases.  It  utilizes  data 
records  and 
retrieve  distributed  medical 
pointers 
Ethereum's smart contracts for permissions, data sharing, and 
mining.  Its  smart  contract  structure  consists  of  Register 
Contract 
(RC),  Patient-Provider  Relationship  Contract 
(PPR),  and  Summary  Contract  (SC).  RC  regulates  new 
identity  registration  and  maps  IDs  with  their  Ethereum 
addresses.  

to 

PPR  defines  data  ownership  and  stewardship  between 
patient and provider, access information such as data pointers 
and access permissions, and mining bounties for researchers. 
Finally, SC is a ledger with all references to PPR contracts. 
Each node consists of backend API library, Ethereum client, 
database gatekeeper, and EHR manager and is managed via a 
web user interface. The backend library aids communication 
between  the  user  interface  and  the  Ethereum  client.  The 
database gatekeeper verifies a query request and returns the 
query result to the user. When a provider adds a new patient, 
the backend library communicates it to the Ethereum client. 
The  Ethereum  client  utilizes  RC  to  create  a  new  PPR 
contract  defining  the  provider's  data  stewardship  for  the 
patient's medical record. The patient's SC gets updated with 
the new PPR contract. Hence, every time a provider requests 
stewardship  for  their  medical  data,  the  patient  will  get  an 
alert  to  grant  or  deny  the  request.  This  way,  patients  keep 
ownership and complete control of their records.  

S. Abdullah et el. [9] suggested potential blockchain use 
cases  in  radiology  such  as  authentication  and  verification, 
administrative  and  governance,  and  research  and  machine 
learning.  Examples  of  blockchain  usage  for  authentication 
and verification include image sharing access control, health 
data  network  authentication,  and  imaging  data  verification. 
Blockchain  can  also  manage  claim  adjudication,  billing, 
supply  chain, 
imaging  equipment  maintenance,  and 
inspection record-keeping for administrative and governance 
purposes.  In  addition,  blockchain  can  enhance  data  sharing 
for research, clinical trials, machine learning training, and AI 
company, 
model 
NucleusHealth  (San  Diego,  CA,  USA)  [10]  uses  Ethereum 
blockchain  to  create  access  control  rules  for  image  sharing 

execution.  An 

imaging 

sharing 

between  two  systems.  Patient  health  information  (PHI)  is 
stored  on  the  blockchain,  nor  is  medical  imaging  data 
transferred within the network. Instead, this Ethereum-based 
image  sharing  application  allows  image  viewing  utilizing 
DICOM  Web  URL  and  DICOMWeb  RESTful  API  while 
keeping the images at the site's resource location. In addition, 
unique exam IDs are stored in the blockchain with the patient 
attached  to  the  exam,  and  smart  contract  allows  patients  to 
share their images by granting access. 

MJH  Faruk  et  al.  [11],  [12]  introduced  Electronic  Data 
Management  (EHR)  by  adopting  both  Ethereum  and 
Hyperledger  Fabric  in  two  different  studies.  Presented 
blockchain-based  data  storing  and  sharing  platform  offer 
patients, healthcare providers and authorized third parties to 
store,  share  and  access  the  EHR  data  seamlessly.  The 
through  smart  credential 
framework  ensures  security 
management,  transparency  by  using  smart  contracts,  and 
finally  incorruptible  nature  of  the  medical  record  storage 
network. M. Jabarulla and H-N Lee [13] proposed a patient-
centric  image  management  system  using  an  Ethereum 
blockchain  and  Inter-Planetary  File  System  (IPFS)-based 
decentralized  framework  to  solve  the  current  system's 
challenges, including privacy, security, access flexibility, and 
costs. It stores and shares access to medical images within an 
open  distributed  network  while  offering  transparency  and 
patients'  complete  control  over  their  images.  In  addition, 
smart  contract  was  used  to  enable  patient-centric  access 
management, through which patients can grant/revoke access 
to their providers.  

B.  Shen  et  el.  [14]  mentioned  scalability  and  latency  as 
one  of  the  top  barriers  to  adopting  existing  blockchain 
applications  and  suggested  a  session-based  data  sharing 
using blockchain to address the problem. MedChain connects 
healthcare organizations through a decentralized network and 
enables  session-based  data  sharing  among  peers.  The 
network has two different peer nodes: super peers and edge 
peers. Super peers provide computing and storage resources 
for  the  data-sharing  infrastructure,  while  edge  peers  store 
patient  data.  Modules  of  super-peer  consist  of  blockchain 
service,  directory 
service,  and  healthcare  database. 
Blockchain  server  keeps  records  of  data  sharing  to  provide 
data  integrity  and  auditing  while  the  directory  server 
manages  patient  data  inventory  and  data  sharing  sessions, 
and  these  servers  form  sub-networks.  Healthcare  database 
stores  patient  data.  The  event  is  recorded  in  the  blockchain 
when new data is generated, and data description is added to 
the directory service. When providers request a patient's data, 
they select the data from their inventory to share, creating a 
session.  The  blockchain  service  adds  the  session  in  a  new 
block  and  issues  a  session  ID  with  which  Providers  can 
access the data.  

Healthcare  blockchain  applications  mentioned  above 
emphasize  patient-centric  healthcare  data  sharing  and 
management. While there have been use cases and research 
on 
improving  patient-centricity  using  blockchain,  few 
researchers  have  taken  utilizing  blockchain  to  improve 
workflow  efficiency  into  consideration.  In  this  paper,  we 
want  to  concentrate  on  improving  workflow  efficiency  in 
teleradiology  with  blockchain  technology.  Our  proposed 
blockchain-based  medical  image  sharing  and  automated 
critical-results  notification  application  will  address  the 
current  challenges  of  teleradiology  workflow  and  provide  a 
potential solution for improved efficiency in the workflow. 

2 

 
B.  Overview of Hyperledger Fabric  

[15], 

technical 

networks 

blockchain 

advantages 

Hyperledger  Fabric  is  an  open-source  framework  for 
permissioned 
[16].  A 
permissioned  network  operates  on  a  closed  network  and  all 
participants  have  known  identities,  contrary  to  a  public 
network  where  anyone  can  enter  the  network  to  see  the 
transaction  records  [17].  Furthermore,  Hyperledger  Fabric 
offers 
enhanced 
performance, scalability, security, and privacy for healthcare 
data.  For  example, 
its  modular  architecture  provides 
optimized  performance,  scalability,  and  levels  of  trust,  and 
data  partitioning 
through  channels  provides  enhanced 
confidentiality  and  privacy  of  data  [18].  Hyperledger 
network  consists  of  peer  nodes,  certificate  authorities  (CA), 
membership  service  providers  (MSP),  chaincode  (smart 
ledger:  world  state  and 
contract),  channels,  shared 
transaction  log,  assets,  organizations,  and  ordering  service 
[19]. 

achieve 

to 

• 

• 

Immutability and integrity of data: Each member has 
a  copy  of  the  ledger.  Distributing  ledger  among 
members  prevents  a  single  point  of  failure  and 
guarantees immutability and integrity.     
Identity  management:  MSP  manages 
authentication  and  authorization 
certificates. 

user 
through  digital 

•  Privacy and confidentiality: Channels can be created 
among a group of network members to keep specific 
transaction data private and confidential.  

•  Speed  and  accuracy:  Smart  contract  define  business 
logic  as  executable  code  and  automates  transactions 
eliminating the need for intermediaries.  

III.    CHALLENGES IN CURRENT TELERADIOLOGY WORKFLOW 

Radiological exams are one of the key diagnostic tools as 
they  provide  anatomic  details  by  visualizing  the  inner  body 
structures.  Therefore,  getting  a  radiology  report  on  time  is 
crucial  for  timely  patient  care  and  disease  management. 
Reducing radiology report turnaround time can significantly 
impact patient outcomes, especially in critical conditions like 
intracranial 
stroke, 
hemorrhage.  We  analyzed  teleradiology's  current  workflow 
to  identify  pain  points  that  cause  delays  in  radiology  report 
turnaround  time  and  interruptions  in  radiologists'  workflow. 
The workflow analysis was performed based on the author’s 
direct work experience as a radiology worklist manager and 
interviews with a radiologist and a support team member. 

acute  pulmonary 

embolism,  or 

A.  Challenges in current workflow  

Image  unavailability 

critical-results 
communication  are  among  the  most  substantial  causes  of 
prolonged  turnaround  time  in  the  current  teleradiology 
workflow.  

and  delayed 

• 

Image availability: As mentioned in the Introduction, 
teleradiologists  do  not  have  direct  access  to  the 
sending site's RIS or PACS [3]. As a result, they can 
only  review  images  once  the  originating  site  sends 
them,  which  creates  potential  inefficiencies  in  the 
image  availability.  First, 
workflow 
regarding 
for 
radiologists  must  communicate 

the  need 

3 

additional data, including missing images, additional 
image  processing,  and  prior  reports.  Second,  it  is 
hard for offsite radiologists to surmise the wholeness 
of data when a study comes over with fewer images 
than standard image sets for the study because there 
is no way to check if the study contains fewer images 
due  to  data  lost  in  transit  or  the  sending  site's 
imaging protocol. Radiologists must request to check 
data completeness as well. 

Figure 1: Current workflow for image request ticket 

As  shown  in  Fig.1,  once  a  teleradiologist  requests 
missing/additional  images  by  creating  a  ticket  from 
the worklist, a support team member contacts the site 
asking  to  resend  the  images.  Upon  receiving  the 
requested  images,  the  support  team  member  closes 
the  ticket  and  makes  the  exam  available  for  the 
radiologist  to  interpret.  This  process  may  sound 
simple;  however,  it  can  easily  take  up  to  20-30 
minutes  in  real-world  scenarios,  involving  multiple 
personnel requiring phone calls and sometimes voice 

 
 
 
mails.  Moreover,  getting  additional  phone  calls  and 
resending images are an extra workload for clinicians 
and can negatively impact their workflow. 

•  Critical-results  communication:  Critical  conditions 
require  immediate  medical  attention.  Therefore, 
these critical findings need to be conveyed promptly. 
The current process for critical result communication 
is the same as requesting images mentioned above; a 
teleradiologist  requests  a  critical  conference  call 
through  a  ticket  from  the  worklist.  Then,  a  support 
team  member  contacts  the  site  to  connect  the 
teleradiologist  with  the  provider.  Although  critical 
conference call request prioritizes others, delays still 
happen  due  to  difficulty  reaching  the  referring 
physician or simply from a large ticket volume.  

Communication System (PACS) and blockchain controls and 
manages access to medical images stored in the onsite PACS 
[20],  [21].  Registered  radiologists  can  request  access  to 
medical  images.  Peer  nodes  in  the  hospital  verify  the 
authenticity  of  the  access  request.  If  access  is  granted,  the 
radiologist will be provided with a link to view the requested 
images. Hash is created for every request and data access and 
gets  recorded  in  a  block.  The  blockchain  is  a  chronological 
log of blocks that are interlinked by block hash. Each block 
consists of a block header and block data. The Block header 
contains hashes of the current block and previous block, and 
block  data  contains  a  list  of  transactions  in  chronological 
order as shown in Figure 3. We further discuss some features 
of our proposed architecture below. 

Blockchain technology can be a potential solution to 
address  these  problems.  Our  proposed  blockchain-
based medical image sharing and automated critical-
results  notification  model  offers  a  fast  and  efficient 
way  to  share  medical  images  and  communicate 
critical 
report 
turnaround time and improve radiologists' workflow 
efficiency. 

radiology 

findings 

reduce 

to 

IV.    PROPOSED ARCHITECTURE 

Figure 3: Structure of blockchain 

We  have  developed  an  architecture  to  improve  image 
availability  and  automate  critical-results  notification.  The 
proposed  architecture  provides  a  private  and  permissioned 
network with all participants having known identities and its 
technical  advantages 
support  enhanced  performance, 
scalability, security, and privacy. Hyperledger Fabric can be 
a suitable implementation for the proposed architecture.  

Figure 2: Proposed architecture 

Figure  2.  shows  our  conceptual  model  for  blockchain-
based  medical  image  sharing  and  automated  critical-results 
notification  application.  This  model  consists  of  users 
(radiologists,  physicians),  organizations  (hospitals),  onsite 
PACS, and blockchain networks. All medical images would 
be stored off-blockchain in the onsite Picture Archiving and 

4 

A.  Registration and enrollment   

All  users  must  register  to  the  blockchain  network  and 
enroll  in  an  organization.  Fabric  certificate  authority  (CA) 
admin proves the user’s identity using public-private key pair 
and issues a user ID. Membership service providers (MSPs) 
link the user’s ID to the membership of an organization and 
define 
the 
organization.   

role  and  permissions 

the  user’s 

inside 

B.  Data access   

Medical images are stored in the site’s PACS, and exam 
IDs are stored in blockchain. Offsite radiologists can request 
access through his/her user application and a link to view the 
images will be provided once the request is verified by peers 
in  the  blockchain  network.  Records  of  access  requests  and 
data access are added to a block in the form of hash and the 
ledger gets updated with a new block. 

C.  Automated critical-results notification   

Smart  contracts  are  invoked  to  send  an  alert  to  the 
referring physician when pre-arranged keywords are detected 
in the radiology report. 

V.    DISCUSSION 

image  viewer, 

We  demonstrated  the  current  teleradiology  workflow  in 
section  III.  A  radiologist  works  with  three  applications: 
worklist, 
application. 
Radiologists can check patient history and exam information, 
get  a  link  to  view  the  images,  and  open  a  ticket  to 
communicate  needs  for  images  or  critical  conference  calls 
from  the  worklist.  Support  team  members  manage  the 
worklist  and  contact  the  site  to  get  the  requested  images  or 

and  dictation 

 
 
 
 
 
 
connect  the  radiologist  to  the  referring  physician  based  on 
the request on a ticket.  

We  believe  that  our  blockchain-based  medical  image 
sharing and automated critical-results notification application 
can enhance efficiency in workflow by eliminating the need 
for  intermediaries.  With  our  application,  radiologists  will 
request images using a user application and be provided with 
a  link  to  view  the  images  after  the  authentication  and 
validation  process.  A  comparison  of  the  two  systems  is 
summarized in Figure 4. 

Figure 4: Workflow comparison 

One of the limitations of our proposed architecture is that 
we did not include patients as an entity as we developed the 
model  emphasizing  workflow  efficiency.  However,  patients 
can  be  added  to  the  network  to  view  their  medical  images 
and request to share images with their physicians. This will 
benefit  patients  by  eliminating  the  need  for  storing  medical 
images  in  hard  copies  (e.g.,  CD  or  DVD).  There  are  also 
limitations  to  implementing  the  new  application,  including 
organizational  and  culture  change,  initial  expenses,  and 
regulations.  Although  the  modular  architecture  of  our 
proposed  model  and  usage  of  the  originating  site’s  PACS 
infrastructure 
implementation  and  aids 
regulatory  compliance,  further  research  on  governance  and 
HIPAA  compliance  is  required  to  optimize  the  adoption  of 
the new application [22], [23]. 

facilitates 

the 

VI.    CONCLUSION 

In  this  paper,  we  proposed  a  blockchain-based  medical 
image  sharing  and  automated  critical-results  notification  to 
improve  efficiency  in  teleradiology  workflow  and  reduce 
radiology report turnaround time for quality patient care. We 
presented  a  detailed  architectural  framework.  We  also 
discussed  challenges  in  the  current  workflow:  prolonged 
turnaround time caused by image unavailability and delayed 
and  how  blockchain 
critical 

communication 

result 

technology  can  be  used  to  address  these  issues.  As  part  of 
future  work,  we  aim  to  implement  our  proposed  model  and 
measure  performance  metrics,  including  efficiency,  and 
average  response  time  to  calculate  how  much  time  can  be 
saved by utilizing our model. 

REFERENCES 

[1] 

[2] 

[3] 

[4] 

[5] 

[6] 

[7] 

[8] 

[9] 

[10] 

“Words  Matter:  Discerning 

Information  and  Management  Systems 
telehealth 
in  U.S. 
Available: 

Healthcare 
Society, 
interpretations,  synonyms  and  misnomers 
Healthcare,” 
https://www.himss.org/sites/hde/files/media/file/2020/11/
09/connectedcareandtelehealthdefinitionsreport_himssacc
eleratehealth_final.pdf. 

[Online]. 

2020, 

to 

M.  Benjamin,  Y.  Aradi,  and  R.  Shreiber,  “From  shared 
data 
sharing  workflow:  Merging  PACS  and 
teleradiology,”  Eur.  J.  Radiol.,  vol.  73,  no.  1,  pp.  3–9, 
2010, doi: 10.1016/j.ejrad.2009.10.014. 

J.  H.  Thrall,  “Teleradiology.  Part  II.  Limitations,  risks, 
and  opportunities,”  Radiology,  vol.  244,  no.  2,  pp.  325–
328, 2007, doi: 10.1148/radiol.2442070676. 

Brandessence  Market  Research,  “Teleradiology  Market 
Size,  Share,  Current  Trends  and  Research  Development 
Report to 2025 | Anticipating a CAGR of 12.80%,” 2020, 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.medgadget.com/2020/06/teleradiology-
market-size-share-current-trends-and-research-
development-report-to-2025-anticipating-a-cagr-of-12-80-
brandessenceresearch-com.html. 

V.  Patel,  “A  framework  for  secure  and  decentralized 
imaging  data  via  blockchain 
sharing  of  medical 
consensus,”  Health  Informatics  J.,  vol.  25,  no.  4,  pp. 
1398–1411, 2019, doi: 10.1177/1460458218769699. 

K.  A.  Clauson,  E.  A.  Breeden,  C.  Davidson,  and  T.  K. 
Mackey, “Leveraging Blockchain Technology to Enhance 
Supply  Chain  Management  in  Healthcare:,”  Blockchain 
Healthc. Today, 2018, doi: 10.30953/bhty.v1.20. 

W.  J.  Gordon  and  C.  Catalini,  “Blockchain  Technology 
for  Healthcare:  Facilitating  the  Transition  to  Patient-
Driven  Interoperability,”  Comput.  Struct.  Biotechnol.  J., 
vol. 
doi: 
10.1016/j.csbj.2018.06.003. 

224–230, 

2018, 

pp. 

16, 

A.  Azaria,  A.  Ekblaw,  T.  Vieira,  and  A.  Lippman, 
“MedRec:  Using  blockchain  for  medical  data  access  and 
permission  management,”  Proc.  -  2016  2nd  Int.  Conf. 
Open  Big  Data,  OBD  2016,  pp.  25–30,  2016,  doi: 
10.1109/OBD.2016.11. 

S.  Abdullah,  S.  Rothenberg,  E.  Siegel,  and  W.  Kim, 
“School  of  Block–Review  of  Blockchain 
the 
Radiologists,”  Acad.  Radiol.,  vol.  27,  no.  1,  pp.  47–57, 
2020, doi: 10.1016/j.acra.2019.06.025. 

for 

Nucleushealth,  “Leading  the  Blockchain  in  Healthcare 
Code-A-Thon  for  ONC,”  2017,  [Online].  Available: 
https://nucleushealth.io/leading-blockchain-in-healthcare-
code-a-thon-onc/. 

[11]  M.  J.  H.  Faruk,  H.  Shahriar,  M.  Valero,  S.  Sneha,  S.  I. 
Ahamed,  and  M.  Rahman,  “Towards  Blockchain-Based 

5 

 
 
 
Secure  Data  Management 
for  Remote  Patient 
Monitoring,”  Proc.  -  2021  IEEE  Int.  Conf.  Digit.  Heal. 
doi: 
ICDH 
10.1109/ICDH52753.2021.00054. 

299–308, 

2021, 

2021, 

pp. 

[12]  M.  J.  Hossain  Faruk,  S.  Hossain,  and  M.  Valero,  “EHR 
Data Management: Hyperledger Fabric-based Health Data 
Storing and Sharing,” Fall 2021 Symp. Student Sch., 2021, 
doi: 10.13140/RG.2.2.20299.05928. 

[13]  M.  Y.  Jabarulla  and  H.  N.  Lee,  “Blockchain-based 
distributed  patient-centric  image  management  system,” 
Appl.  Sci.,  vol.  11,  no.  1,  pp.  1–20,  2021,  doi: 
10.3390/app11010196. 

[14] 

[15] 

[16] 

B.  Shen,  J.  Guo,  and  Y.  Yang,  “MedChain:  Efficient 
healthcare data sharing via blockchain,” Appl. Sci., vol. 9, 
no. 6, 2019, doi: 10.3390/app9061207. 

1–6, 

G.  S.  Sharon  Cocco,  “Top  6  technical  advantages  of 
Hyperledger Fabric for blockchain networks,” IBM  Dev., 
pp. 
Available: 
https://developer.ibm.com/tutorials/cl-top-technical-
advantages-of-hyperledger-fabric-for-blockchain-
networks/. 

[Online]. 

2018, 

R.  Shivers,  M.  A.  Rahman,  M.  J.  H.  Faruk,  H.  Shahriar, 
for 
A.  Cuzzocrea,  and  V.  Clincy,  “Ride-Hailing 
Autonomous  Vehicles:  Hyperledger  Fabric-Based  Secure 
and  Decentralize  Blockchain  Platform,”  Proc.  -  2021 
IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data, Big Data 2021, pp. 5450–5459, 
2021, doi: 10.1109/BigData52589.2021.9671379. 

[17]  M.  J.  Hossain  Faruk  et  al.,  “BieVote:  A  Biometric 

Identification  Enabled  Blockchain-Based  Secure  and 
Transparent  Voting  Framework,”  2022, 
[Online]. 
Available: researchgate.net/publication/357861285. 

G.  Zyskind,  O.  Nathan,  and  A.  S.  Pentland, 
“Decentralizing  privacy:  Using  blockchain  to  protect 
personal  data,”  Proc.  -  2015  IEEE  Secur.  Priv.  Work. 
doi: 
pp. 
2015, 
SPW 
10.1109/SPW.2015.27. 

180–184, 

2015, 

IBM,  “What 
[Online]. 
https://www.ibm.com/topics/hyperledger. 

is  Hyperledger  Fabric?,”  Ibm,  2021, 
Available: 

L. A. Linn and M. B. Koo, “Blockchain For Health Data 
and  Its  Potential  Use  in  Health  IT  and  Health  Care 
Related  Research,”  ONC/NIST  Use  Blockchain  Healthc. 
Res. Work., pp. 1–10, 2016. 

Brodersen,  C.  B.  Kalis,  C.  Leong,  E.  Mitchell,  E.  Pupo, 
and  A.  Truscott,  “Blockchain :  Securing  a  New  Health 
Interoperability  Experience,”  NIST  Work.  Blockchain 
doi: 
no.  August, 
Healthc., 
10.1001/jama.2012.362.4. 

1–11, 

2016, 

pp. 

US  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Sciences 
(HHS.gov), “HIPAA for professionals,” HHS.gov, pp. 1–
Available: 
2, 
https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/index.html. 

[Online]. 

2017, 

A. Hasselgren, P. K. Wan, M. Horn, K. Kralevska, and D. 
Gligoroski, 
for  Blockchain 
Applications  in  Healthcare,”  pp.  23–35,  2020,  doi: 
10.5121/csit.2020.101303. 

“GDPR  Compliance 

[18] 

[19] 

[20] 

[21] 

[22] 

[23] 

6 

 
 
