American Society of Engineering Education, April 22-23rd, 2022 – Wentworth Institute of Technology 

Printable Flexible Robots for Remote Learning 
Savita V. Kendre,1 Gus. T. Teran,1 Lauryn Whiteside,1 Tyler Looney,1  
Ryley Wheelock,1 Surya Ghai,1 and Markus P. Nemitz1* 

The  COVID-19  pandemic  has  revealed  the  importance  of  digital  fabrication  to  enable  online 
learning, which remains a challenge for robotics courses. We introduce a teaching methodology 
that allows students to participate remotely in a hands-on robotics course involving the design and 
fabrication of robots. Our methodology employs 3D printing techniques with flexible filaments to 
create  innovative  soft  robots;  robots  are  made  from  flexible,  as  opposed  to  rigid,  materials. 
Students design flexible robotic components such as actuators, sensors, and controllers using CAD 
software, upload their designs to a remote 3D printing station, monitor the print with a web camera, 
and inspect the components with lab staff before being mailed for testing and assembly. At the end 
of the course, students will have iterated through several designs and created fluidically-driven 
soft robots. Our remote teaching methodology enables educators to utilize 3D printing resources 
to teach soft robotics and cultivate creativity among students to design novel and innovative robots. 
Our  methodology  seeks  to  democratize  robotics  engineering  by  decoupling  hands-on  learning 
experiences from expensive equipment in the learning environment. 

Introduction 

A.  Impact of remote learning in engineering courses  

Restriction of in-person classes during COVID-19 affected the hands-on learning experience of 
students from the fields of engineering and science [1]. Faculty in the engineering disciplines, such 
as robotics, have particularly struggled to teach students without in-person, hands-on laboratory 
sessions [2]. Robotics courses rely on the physical integration of systems which becomes difficult 
to accomplish when access to lab equipment is limited [3]. The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has 
revealed the importance of a sustainable remote education system that allows the combination of 
theory and practice. Digital fabrication techniques are becoming a valuable tool to provide hands-
on experience for students during online learning. 

B.  Importance of design and fabrication in robotics engineering 

Robotics is a multi-disciplinary field that includes an understanding of mechanics, electronics, and 
computer science [4]. Any conventional, rigid robotic system is made from electro-mechanical and 
electronic  parts  such  as  motors,  power  electronics,  and  controllers.  Conventional  robots  are 
typically purchased off-the-shelf and are being programmed to study robot behaviors or specific 
tasks (e.g., welding car joints in the auto industry). When roboticists develop conventional robots, 
they design, fabricate, and assemble robotic links and joints, and integrate sensors and electronics 
throughout the robot body.  

1Department of Robotics Engineering, Worcester Polytechnic Institute, 100 Institute Road, Worcester, MA 01609, USA. 
*Corresponding author. Email: mnemitz@wpi.edu  

Kendre et al., ASEE (2022) 

1 of 9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
American Society of Engineering Education, April 22-23rd, 2022 – Wentworth Institute of Technology 

For educational purposes, there are robotic kits available that allow students to assemble their own 
robots [5]. These robotic kits can be challenging to use for remote education as the failure of a 
single component can affect the functionality of an entire robot. The ongoing shortage of silicon 
chips may delay the delivery of electronic components. In general, limitations on rapid shipment 
of replacement parts and restrictions to lab equipment such as oscilloscopes can further frustrate 
and hinder students from making progress. In contrast to conventional robots, soft robots, made 
from flexible and stretchable materials, do not require as many electronic or electro-mechanical 
components  as  rigid  robots.  Soft  robots  can  be  made  from  a  single  material,  allowing  sensors, 
actuators, and controllers to operate using pressurized air instead of electricity.  

C.  Replica molding of pneumatically driven soft robots 

Soft robots have shown a wide variety of advantages compared to rigid robots including low-cost, 
safety, compatibility in interaction with humans and animals, and resistance to impact or corrosive 
chemicals,  among  others  [6].  Soft  robots  have  been  actuated  in  numerous  ways  including 
magnetics, electro-statics, hydraulics, and pneumatics. Pneumatics has been the most commonly 
used  actuation  strategy;  cavities  made  from  stretchable  materials  expand  upon  pressurization, 
which can be used for locomotion, gripping of delicate objects, or shape-changing, among others 
[7].  

Figure 1: Single-channel pneumatic network (PneuNet) fabricated using replica-molding.  
(A) Unactuated state of PneuNet. (B) Actuated state of PneuNet at 10 kPa air pressure. 

One example of a pneumatic soft robotic actuator is the pneumatic network (PneuNet) (Figure 1). 
PneuNets consist of networks of inflatable chambers that are interconnected with fluidic channels 
[8]. The chambers are similar to inflatable balloons, except that they can withstand large strains (> 
900%) without plastically deforming. When positive pressure is applied, the chamber inflates and 
deforms based on the patterning profile (Figure 1B). Hence, the design of the pneumatic network 
determines the directional expansion [9].  

PneuNets  are  typically  fabricated  using  replica  molding  (Figure  2A).  First,  the  design  of  a 
PneuNet is created using CAD software (e.g., Autodesk Inventor). Second, the negative image of 
the PneuNet (i.e., mold) is fabricated using a 3D printer or CNC machine. Third, a commercially 
available additive curing elastomer is mixed, degassed in a vacuum chamber, and poured into the 
mold. The degassing process of the elastomer avoids air bubbles from being cast into the mold. 
Fourth, the elastomer needs to cure, whereas the curing time depends on the type of elastomer used 
and  curing  temperature.  Last,  the  top  and  bottom  casted  parts  are  assembled  using  additional 
additive curing elastomer or epoxy. 

Kendre et al., ASEE (2022) 

2 of 9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
American Society of Engineering Education, April 22-23rd, 2022 – Wentworth Institute of Technology 

Figure 2: Comparison of fabrication techniques for fluidically-driven soft devices (A) Fabrication 
steps for replica molding to create a soft device. (B) Fabrication steps for 3D printing of a soft device. 

The exploration of designs and characterization of components using replica molding is laborious 
and time-consuming due to the multi-step fabrication process. Most importantly, replica molding 
requires specialized equipment such as a vacuum chamber and a workspace for casting elastomers 
including  personal  protective  equipment  such  as  lab  coats  and  gloves,  making  it  a  challenging 
fabrication technique to adopt in a remote classroom. Recent work on 3D printing soft materials, 
however, shows promise towards simplifying the fabrication process of soft devices. By printing 
multiple flexible materials with a single printer, it is possible to create complex designs using a 
single-step fabrication process. 

D.  3D printing of pneumatically driven soft robots.  

3D  printing,  a  form  of  additive  manufacturing,  is  a  process  of  rapid  deposition  of  materials  to 
create an object by layer-wise controlled deposition through software. There are different types of 
3D printers and printing protocols, which allow increasingly complex designs. Wallin et al. discuss 
common  3D  printing  techniques  for  soft  robots  including  fused  deposition  modeling  (FDM), 
stereolithography  (SLA),  direct  ink  writing  (DIW),  and  selective  laser  sintering  (SLS),  among 
others [10]. These techniques use filaments, inks, powders, or resins as printing materials.  

FDM  printing  is  the  most  common  3D  printing  fabrication  technique;  it  uses  the  melting  of  a 
filament to construct an object in successive layers [10]. For FDM printing soft devices, first, the 
design of components is created in CAD software, then it is printed using flexible filaments, and 
last, the component is tested (Figure 2B). In comparison to replica molding, 3D printed flexible 
filaments solidify at the time of printing; 3D prints can be used directly after fabrication. While 
replica molding is a multi-step fabrication process (Figure 2A), 3D printing allows for a single-
step fabrication of soft robots (Figure 2B). 

Kendre et al., ASEE (2022) 

3 of 9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
American Society of Engineering Education, April 22-23rd, 2022 – Wentworth Institute of Technology 

Figure 3: Comparison of fabrication times of a PneuNet with replica molding and FDM printing. The 
graphs detail the time distribution of fabrication steps in both, replica molding and FDM printing. (A) Replica 
molding a PneuNet takes approximately 8 hours, assuming perfect timing between fabrication steps. (B) FDM 
printing a PneuNet takes approximately 4 hours. We excluded the time for designing a PneuNet from the 
overall fabrication time. Green bars indicate manual fabrication steps executed by a person; blue bars indicate 
tasks that can be left unattended. 

For example, YAP. et al. demonstrated the fabrication of a single and dual-channel pneumatically 
activated linear actuator on a FDM printer with flexible filament [11]. Wallin et al. showcased the 
use of a multi-material 3D printer to integrate soft actuators and sensors [12]. The fabrication of a 
single-channel PneuNet with replica molding takes ~8 hours, whereas it can be 3D printed in ~4 
hours (Figure 3).  
The increasing use of FDM printing has led to a wide range of printers that fit diverse needs, many 
supported filaments, decreasing costs, and comprehensive online support. FDM printers are low-
cost such as the Prusa Mini+ ($399), Prusa MK3S ($899), or Creality Ender 3 Pro ($189), and 
have been tested with flexible filaments to create soft actuators, sensors, and controllers. FDM 
printers can be easily set up to a remotely accessible printing service including webcams and open-
source software (e.g., OctoPrint), therewith allowing elastomeric robots and their components to 
be printed remotely. Our methodology uses FDM printing among other 3D printing techniques 
due to its low-cost, easy adoption, commercial availability, a wide range of materials, and multi-
material and remote printing capabilities.  

Methodology  

We developed a remote learning methodology using printable, flexible robots to cultivate a hands-
on learning experience for robotics engineering students (Figure 4). We divide our methodology 

Kendre et al., ASEE (2022) 

4 of 9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
American Society of Engineering Education, April 22-23rd, 2022 – Wentworth Institute of Technology 

into four sections (i) design of printable robots, (ii) web-based interface for remote printing and 
monitoring, (iii) inspection and delivery by teaching staff, and (iv) assembly and testing at home. 

A.  Design of printable robots 

Students design pneumatically driven soft robots through iterative design. They create designs for 
their  robots  comprised  of  fluidic  sensors,  actuators,  control  logic,  and  channels,  using  existing 
sample designs (e.g., 3D printed single-channel actuators [11]) from academic literature. Students 
will learn to design CAD models of their components with consideration to FDM printing flexible 
materials  and  slice  their  prints  into  a  gcode  file.  The  laboratory  assistant  will  provide  print 
parameters and best practices in 3D printing to students. 

Figure 4: A flowchart of using 3D printing for soft robotics for remote learning. Students choose a 
component of their soft robot (i.e., sensor, actuator, or controller), and design and discuss their 
implementation with lab staff. Once the design is approved, it is sent to the printing station, and the print is 
tested together with the lab assistant. Successful prints are being shipped to students and once all 
components have been printed and shipped, the entire soft robot can be assembled by students at home. 

B.  Web-based interface for remote printing and monitoring 

The lab instructor will connect 3D printers, and one camera per printer, to a web-based interface 
using open-source software (e.g., Repetier or OctoPrint). Students will be granted access to the 

Kendre et al., ASEE (2022) 

5 of 9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
American Society of Engineering Education, April 22-23rd, 2022 – Wentworth Institute of Technology 

web  interface  to  connect  to  the  3D  printers  remotely.  After  consultation  with  the  lab  assistant, 
students will slice their designs, taking into consideration the model of the 3D printer and printed 
material.  Once  students  uploaded  their  prints  to  the  web-based  interface,  they  can  monitor  the 
progress of their print through the web camera feed. 

C.  Inspection and delivery by teaching staff 

Lab  staff  will  remove  the  component  from  the  printer,  inspect  it  for  print  failures,  potentially 
remove  support  materials,  and  label  the  component.  Lab  staff  can  evaluate  the  quality  of  the 
component  by  performing  characterization  tests  as  requested  by  the  student.  If  a  student  is 
unsatisfied with the characteristics of the component, they will iterate on the design and print a 
new version of their component. When the component operates as intended, the lab staff will ship 
the print to the student using a service such as USPS, FedEx, or Sendle. It costs approximately $4 
to $10 to send a package using these services. 

D.  Assembly and testing at home 

Students will receive their components through mail. They will inspect and test each component 
to understand the functionality of soft structures. Students can use this hands-on experience with 
a flexible material to design their next component. Once all components are printed and shipped, 
students  will  complete  their  assembly  by  interconnecting  pneumatic  channels  with  tubes  or 
connectors supplied in the shipments. To actuate pneumatically driven soft robots, students can 
buy a low-cost pump for approximately $20 (12 V diaphragm pump, Amazon.com). The actuation 
pressure depends on the material of the filament and the structure of the soft device. Students can 
experiment with their assembled robot and observe the capabilities of soft robots.  

Discussion 

A.  Comparison of the methodology to existing robotic kits 

Many robotics kits exist for mobile robots that can be incorporated into teaching robotic courses. 
These robotic kits can be challenging to use in remote learning without an immediate availability 
of  a  lab.  The  modular  design  of  these  robots  (e.g.,  Adafruit’s  2  wheeled  robot,  Romi  robot)  is 
beneficial to students in-person when it is easy to receive a new component from a bulk supply in 
the lab; however, when remote, the failure of a single part requires students to purchase and ship 
a  new  component.  Limitations  in  shipping  and  backlogs  from  vendors  can  hinder  students’ 
progress. Lastly, students will have trouble when debugging electronics without equipment such 
as  oscilloscopes,  multimeters,  or  function  generators.  Resources,  such  as  The  Soft  Robotics 
Toolkit, exist to aid educators to create various designs such as grippers, cord-activated fingers, or 
pneumatic wrist braces, among others.  

3D printed components that students will create with our methodology not only allow students to 
cultivate their creativity and ingenuity but will also be lower in cost than electronic components. 
Costs for a traditional mobile robot for education range from $40 to $400 [13]. A single PneuNet 
actuator  requires  approximately  15  grams  of  filament.  When  a  high-quality  filament  such  as 
Ninjaflex 85A from NinjaTek is used, the PneuNet will need $0.69 worth of material to print.  

Kendre et al., ASEE (2022) 

6 of 9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
American Society of Engineering Education, April 22-23rd, 2022 – Wentworth Institute of Technology 

B.  How does this methodology apply to other engineering courses? 

We  envision  extrapolation  of  our  methodology  to  other  engineering  fields  such  as  biomedical 
engineering, electrical engineering, and aerospace engineering using a remote 3D printing station. 
For example, the biomedical engineering discipline includes courses on soft bendable continuous 
robots to help doctors with surgery or inspection of body parts [14]. Recent work on conductive 
filaments  allow  students  from  electrical  engineering  to  develop  their  own  circuit  diagrams  and 
work  on  flexible  electronic  circuits  using  multi-material  FDM  printers  [15].  SLA  printers  with 
ceramic resins can be post-processed in a kiln to produce small rocket parts, allowing aerospace 
students to experiment with nozzle characteristics and designs of rocket parts [16].  

C.  Limitations of 3D printing soft robots 

Although FDM printing with flexible materials makes our methodology scalable, FDM printing is 
not always the optimal solution for the fabrication of soft robots. We are limited by the filaments 
that are currently commercially available and their material properties. For example, Filaflex 60A 
Pro is the most elastic 3D printing filament currently on the market with a shore hardness of 60A 
(softness of car tire rubber). In comparison, additive curing elastomers (e.g., EcoFlex 00-10) can 
have a shore hardness as low as 00-10A (the same softness as gummy bears). Printing flexible 
materials also requires expertise. Some common problems that occur when working with flexible 
filaments  are  increased  print  times  and  entangled  filament  in  the  feed  gears.  Other  printing 
techniques  such  as  SLA,  can  produce  higher  quality  prints  of  softer  materials,  however,  they 
require time-consuming printing protocols including post-processing of components. We chose 
FDM printing due to its low cost, and availability and scalability for classrooms. Soft robots can 
be made from an integrated modular structure, in which our actuators can be 3D printed using 
flexible filaments and can be controlled via conventional control means.  

D.  Limitations with lab logistics 

Other limitations to this methodology come from the logistics of running  a fabrication lab and 
from shipping. The number of 3D printers available in a laboratory affects the number of parts that 
can be produced simultaneously. A trained lab staff member must be around in case of failed prints; 
otherwise, students can also inform lab staff of print defects by watching their printer remotely. 
The  lab  staff  will  also  have  to  remove  completed  prints  and  load  filaments  into  the  printers. 
However, we believe that careful scheduling of lab staff and prints will circumvent most of these 
issues. 

The cost and time of shipping directly impact our methodology. Students in different parts of the 
country could receive their parts at different times and costs. Shipping to different locations within 
the United States costs about the same, but the cost dramatically increases with expedited shipping. 
The instructor can minimize shipping costs by consolidating components where possible. Students 
will mitigate the need for immediate shipping by working with the lab staff to characterize their 
components and iterate rather than shipping every print. In general, we believe this methodology 
will  succeed  when  executed  by  schools  within  their  locality,  whereas  experiences  of  this 
methodology can be exchanged at international conferences. 

Kendre et al., ASEE (2022) 

7 of 9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
American Society of Engineering Education, April 22-23rd, 2022 – Wentworth Institute of Technology 

Conclusion 

We introduced a remote learning methodology that utilizes printable, flexible robots to cultivate a 
hands-on  learning  experience,  where  robotics  engineering  students  can  design,  fabricate,  and 
assemble their robots. Students will learn fundamental skills such as design, fabrication, testing, 
and characterization of robotics components. We propose learning methods based on 3D printing, 
that is becoming an essential technology for customized robots. Working with printable flexible 
robots  enables  students  to  broaden  their  horizons  from  conventional  robots.  With  an  existing 
infrastructure of 3D printers, the cost of our methodology is at a minimum; it is solely the price of 
the flexible filament and the price of shipping. Students will gather experience with FDM printing 
of  flexible  filaments,  iterative  design,  and  hands-on  experiments  with  their  robots  being  off-
campus.  Our  methodology  of  remote  printing  of  flexible  components  gives  access  to  robotics 
engineering education to students by decoupling the need for access to laboratory equipment.  

References 

[1] 

S.  Asgari,  J.  Trajkovic,  M.  Rahmani,  W.  Zhang,  R.  C.  Lo,  and  A.  Sciortino,  “An 
observational  study  of  engineering  online  education  during  the  COVID-19  pandemic,” 
PLOS ONE, vol. 16, no. 4, Apr. 2021, doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0250041. 

[2]  A. Schleicher, “The impact of COVID-19 on education: Insights from education at a glance 

2020,” OECD, 2020. 

[3]  V.  Potkonjak  et  al.,  “Virtual  laboratories  for  education  in  science,  technology,  and 
engineering: A review,” Computers and Education, vol. 95, pp. 309–327, Apr. 2016, doi: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2016.02.002. 

[4]  C.  A.  Berry,  M.  A.  Gennert,  and  R.  Marie  Reck,  “Practical  Skills  for  Students  in 
Mechatronics  and  Robotics  Education,”  American  Society  for  Engineering  Education, 
2020. 

[5]  N.  Koceska  and  S.  Koceski,  “A  Review  of  Robotic  Kits  Used  for  Education  Purposes,” 
International Conference on Information Technology and Development of Education. 2019. 
[6]  G. M. Whitesides, “Soft-Robotics,” Angewandte Chemie, vol. 130, no. 16, pp. 4336–4353, 

Apr. 2018, doi: 10.1002/ange.201800907. 

[8] 

[7]  D. Rus and M. T. Tolley, “Design, fabrication and control of soft robots,” Nature, vol. 521, 
no. 7553. Nature Publishing Group, pp. 467–475, May 27, 2015. doi: 10.1038/nature14543. 
F. Ilievski, A. D. Mazzeo, R. F. Shepherd, X. Chen, and G. M. Whitesides, “Soft Robotics 
for Chemists,” Angewandte Chemie International Edition, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1890–1895, 
Feb. 2011, doi: 10.1002/anie.201006464. 
P. Vessakosol and A. Souhail, “PneuNets bending actuator design and fabrication using low 
cost 
Available: 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/329736390 

silicones,” 

[Online]. 

2018. 

[9] 

[10]  T. J. Wallin, J. Pikul, and R. F. Shepherd, “3D printing of soft robotic systems,” Nature 
Reviews  Materials,  vol.  3,  no.  6.  Nature  Publishing  Group,  pp.  84–100,  Jun.  2018.  doi: 
10.1038/s41578-018-0002-2. 

[11]  H.  K.  Yap,  H.  Y.  Ng,  and  C.  H.  Yeow,  “High-Force  Soft  Printable  Pneumatics  for  Soft 
Robotic  Applications,”  Soft  Robotics,  vol.  3,  no.  3,  pp.  144–158,  Sep.  2016,  doi: 
10.1089/soro.2016.0030. 

Kendre et al., ASEE (2022) 

8 of 9 

 
 
 
 
 
American Society of Engineering Education, April 22-23rd, 2022 – Wentworth Institute of Technology 

[12]  T. J. Wallin, J. Pikul, and R. F. Shepherd, “3D printing of soft robotic systems,” Nature 
Reviews Materials, vol. 3, no. 6. Nature Publishing Group, pp. 84–100, Jun. 01, 2018. doi: 
10.1038/s41578-018-0002-2. 

[13]  F. C. Francisco M. López-Rodríguez, “Andruino-A1: Low-Cost Educational Mobile Robot 
Based on Android and Arduino,” Journal of Intelligent and Robotic Systems, vol. 81, no. 1, 
pp. 63–76, 2016, doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10846-015-0227-x. 

[14]  M.  Cianchetti,  C.  Laschi,  A.  Menciassi,  and  P.  Dario,  “Biomedical  applications  of  soft 
robotics,” Nature Reviews Materials, vol. 3, no. 6. Nature Publishing Group, pp. 143–153, 
Jun. 01, 2018. doi: 10.1038/s41578-018-0022-y. 

[15]  P.  F.  Flowers,  C.  Reyes,  S.  Ye,  M.  J.  Kim,  and  B.  J.  Wiley,  “3D  printing  electronic 
components and circuits with conductive thermoplastic filament,” Additive Manufacturing, 
vol. 18, pp. 156–163, Dec. 2017, doi: 10.1016/j.addma.2017.10.002. 

[16]  V.  Kumar,  R.  Makade,  and  N.  Mehla,  “Advancement  of  rapid  prototyping  in  aerospace 
industry -a review,” International Journal of Engineering Science and Technology, vol. 3, 
no. 3, pp. 2486–2493, 2011. 

Kendre et al., ASEE (2022) 

9 of 9 

 
  
 
