Competency of the Developmental Layer Alters Evolutionary Dynamics in 
an Artificial Embryogeny Model of Morphogenesis  

Lakshwin Shreesha1 and Michael Levin2,* 

1   Université Paris Cité 
     UFR Fundamental and Biomedical Sciences 
     Paris, France 

2  Allen Discovery Center 
    Tufts University 
    Medford, MA 

* Author for correspondence: 

Email: michael.levin@tufts.edu  
Tel.: (617) 627-6161 

Keywords: 

artificial life, in silico, artificial embryogeny, evolutionary computation, 
development, morphogenesis, basal cognition 

Running title: 

Developmental competency in evolution 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 

Biological genotypes do not code directly for phenotypes; developmental physiology 
is  the  control  layer  that  separates  genomes  from  capacities  ascertained  by  selection.  A  key 
aspect  is  competency,  as  cells  are  not  a  passive  material  but  descendants  of  unicellular 
organisms with complex context-sensitive capabilities. We used an evolutionary simulation in 
the context of minimal artificial embryogeny to probe the effects of different degrees of cellular 
competency on evolutionary dynamics. Virtual embryos consisted of a single axis of positional 
information  values  provided  by  cells’  genomes,  operated  upon  by  an  evolutionary  cycle  in 
which embryos’ fitness was proportional to monotonicity of the axial gradient. Evolutionary 
dynamics were evaluated in two modes: hardwired “mosaic” development (genotype directly 
encodes phenotype), and a more realistic mode in which cells interact prior to evaluation by 
the  fitness  function  (“regulative”  development).  Even  minimal  competency  with  respect  to 
improving their position in the embryo results in better performance of the evolutionary search. 
Crucially, we observed that as competency of cells masks the raw fitness of the genomes, the 
phenotypic fitness gains are then mostly due to improvements of cells’ developmental problem-
solving capacities, not the structural genome. This suggests the existence of a powerful ratchet 
mechanism: evolution progressively becomes locked in to improvements in the intelligence of 
its agential substrate, with reduced pressure on the structural genome. A feedback loop in which 
evolution  increasingly  puts  more  effort  into  the  developmental  software  than  perfecting  the 
hardware  explains  the  very  puzzling  divergence  of  genome  from  anatomy  in  species  like 
planaria, identifies a possible drive for scaling intelligence over time, and suggests strategies 
for engineering novel systems in silico and in bioengineering. 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 

The canonical picture of evolution is that of a process in which genomes change over 
time due to selection of organisms’ functionality in some environmental niche in which they 
compete. One of the critical aspects of real biology however, which is only sometimes taken 
into account in evolutionary computation and theoretical biology efforts, is that the mapping 
between genotype and phenotype is not direct  [1-13]. The genome is not a direct blueprint of 
the  anatomy,  and  genes  generally  do  not  directly  encode  for  structure  and  function  of  the 
organism. The layer of control that sits between genomes (on which mutation operates) and 
anatomy (the phenotype which is the subject of selection) is developmental physiology. Real 
organisms emerge as the results of a complex set of interactions among cells, with anatomical 
order and functionality being the result of cellular activities. While genomes specify the cellular 
hardware (proteins), it is the software studied by developmental biologists that is ultimately 
responsible for the organism’s overall structure and behavior. 

The indirect relationship between genotype and phenotype has a number of important 
implications. For example, it is currently impossible to guess the anatomy of an organism by 
examining its genome – overall symmetry type, number and kinds of organs, size, regenerative 
capacity, etc. can only be estimated if one compares a genome to that of another organism for 
which all of these things are already known. Likewise, if one has access to complete genomes, 
for example of the frog and axolotl, one cannot guess the shape of a chimeric embryo: will a 
“frogolotl”, consisting of 50% of each kind of cells, make legs (like an axolotl larva) or not 
(like a tadpole)? This is because while much research has shed light on molecular mechanisms 
necessary for morphogenesis, the field still largely lacks an understanding of the key dynamics 
that  determine  form  and  function:  large-scale  anatomical  decision-making  by  cellular 
collectives [14-16].  

Moreover, the simple story of genomes determining anatomy is shown to be incomplete 
by  examples  such  as  the  highly  regenerative  planarian  [14]:  due  to  some  flatworm  species’ 
reproduction by fissioning and regeneration, they retain mutations made in the parents’ body 
and pass them to the offspring (somatic inheritance). As a result, planaria have an incredibly 
messy  genome  (indeed,  worms  are  mixoploid  –  different  numbers  of  chromosomes  in  each 
cell) but have the most reliable anatomy: every fragment of a planarian regenerates a perfect 
worm each time. They are essentially immortal, and highly resistant to cancer [17].  How can 
the animal with the most chaotic genome have the most reliable, robust anatomy? Fundamental 
knowledge gaps in this area  concern not only  basic evolutionary developmental biology but 
also  have  practical  implications  in  that  they  limit  our  ability  to  make  desired  system-level 
changes to complex anatomy in the context of regenerative medicine [18-20]. 

Developmental  outcomes  are  not  micromanaged  by  the  genome;  instead,  they  result 
from the interactions of subunits (cells) that were once independent organisms  – they are an 
agential [21], not a passive, material. One of the most remarkable qualities of this process is its 
competency  in  reaching  an  adaptive  outcome  despite  novel  starting  states  and  perturbations 
[15,22,23]. For example, mammalian embryos can be split into pieces, and each piece gives rise 
to  a  complete  organism  (monozygotic  twinning).  Some  animals  keep  these  regenerative 
capacities into adulthood – salamanders whose limbs (or eyes, jaws, tails, etc.) are amputated 
will re-grow exactly the missing portion and then stop when the correct structure is complete 
[24]. Tadpoles with scrambled faces become largely normal frogs, as the craniofacial organs 
move  in  novel  paths  until  the  correct  configuration  is  achieved  [25-27].  This  means  that 
mutations resulting in noise or  changes  in initial positions of the organs, which would have 
been disastrous for a hardwired architecture, will not have a strong effect on survival because 
the competency of the tissues will make needed reconfigurations despite the errors in initial 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
state. And finally, skin cells isolated from frog embryos self-assemble into a novel, coherent, 
motile proto-organism that has properties like kinematic self-replication [28-30].  

The  competency  of  the  developmental  layer  has  been  proposed  to  result  from  the 
navigation  policies  of  a  collective  intelligence  of  cells  in  anatomical  morphospace,  as  an 
evolutionary precursor to the intelligence of neural cells which are well known to navigate 3-
dimensional  and  other  problem  spaces  [15,22].  What  is  very  poorly  understood  are  the 
implications  of  these  dynamics  for  the  evolutionary  process.  How  do  diverse  levels  of 
competency in the cellular collective impact the rate and course of the evolutionary process? 

We undertook a quantitative investigation of these questions using a minimal model of 
artificial  embryogeny.  In  our  system,  virtual  embryos  consist  of  a  1-dimensional  array  of 
integers, with fitness being proportional to the degree of monotonicity of those values. This 
simulates an animal with a single axis of positional information values (such as the anterior-
posterior  axis)  [31,32].  The  values  of  an  animal’s  axis  (phenotype)  are  determined  by  its 
genome, which sets the order. In the baseline (control) case, we use a direct encoding where 
the phenotype is a direct consequence of the genotype – the genes directly specify the order of 
values  in  each  animal.  Under  these  conditions,  a  genetic  algorithm  eventually  produces 
genomes  in  which  all  the  values  are  in  the  correct  (monotonic)  order.  We  compare  these 
outcomes to a more realistic case, in which the mapping is not direct: during the developmental 
process, the individual cells have some degree of competency to rearrange themselves based 
on their local environment. Cells can move to numerically more-advantageous positions, before 
fitness evaluation (corresponding to embryogenesis in which cells act before the animal’s adult 
fitness is ascertained in the environment). This in effect performs a limited “bubble sort” [33], 
highlighting  the  conceptual  similarity  between  sorting  algorithms  and  navigation  in  a 
geometric problem space. Importantly, our system does not include Lamarckian inheritance (it 
features a strong barrier between soma and germline): the rearrangements are present for each 
individual but the only thing that gets passed on to their offspring is their un-altered (pre-swap) 
genome.  In  other  words, 
the  results  of  enacted  competency  are  not  passed  on 
transgenerationally [34,35]. 

We varied the degree of competency (how many swaps are cells allowed to perform 
before fitness evaluation), and tracked the dynamics of the resulting evolution, both in terms 
of  raw  genotypic  fitness  (how  fit  would  the  individual  be  if  its  genome  were  allowed  to 
determine  the  phenotype  “as-is”  –  with  no  cellular  movement  to  improve  ordering),  and 
phenotypic fitness (how good is the axis order after the cells have finished their movements). 
We observed a number of interesting outcomes. First, including a developmental layer 
improves evolutionary efficiency, proportion to the degree of the cells’ competency. Second, 
in mixed populations, competent individuals tend to eventually dominate the population. Third, 
when the degree of competency is itself allowed to evolve, populations settle on a specific (sub-
maximal)  level  of  competency.  Finally,  and  most  critically,  we  observed  that  because 
competency  hides  genetic  deficiencies  from  selection,  pressure  to  improve  the  structural 
genome  is  released,  while  pressure  to  improve  the  competency  of  cells  is  increased.  These 
dynamics  establish a positive feedback loop  in which populations advance by progressively 
improving cellular capacities, not just starting configurations. This provides an explanation for 
the otherwise mysterious disconnect between planarian genomes and their amazing anatomical 
robustness,  and  suggests  the  existence  of  an  evolutionary  ratchet  working  to  optimize 
intelligence in even very basal forms (i.e., the collective intelligence of cell groups) [36-41]. 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Methods 

General computational details 
•  All 

code  was  written 

in 

python 

3.9 

and 

is 

available 

on  Github: 

[https://github.com/Niwhskal/CellularCompetency]  

•  The numpy python package was used for creating and manipulating arrays. 
•  Seaborn, and matplotlib python plotting libraries were used for the plots. 
•  Experiments were run on an ARM based M1 13-inch 8 core macbook pro (2020), equipped 

with 8GB of RAM. 

•  Experiments were run as separate processes using the multiprocessing python package. At 
any given time, eight different processes were initialized to run eight different experiments. 
Each of these were assigned to one of eight CPU cores. A single process was initialized to 
run a single thread. 

•  Version control was ensured through the Git version control system. 

Creating Populations for Evolution 

A population consists of a number of individuals. Each individual is considered to be a 
one-dimensional array of fixed size. Each byte of this array is considered analogous to the cell 
of an individual. Each cell is initialized with a single integer from the interval [1, array_size] 
(two or more cells are allowed to carry the same integer value). The integer-value that a cell 
carries  is  considered  to  be  a  gene,  and  its  magnitude  as  a  specification  of  how  much  it  is 
expressed. We call the set of all genes of a population as the individuals’ “Structural genes”. 
In  all  our  experiments  an  array_size  of  50  is  chosen.  Unless  otherwise  mentioned,  each 
population is initialized with 100 individuals. 

Fitness of an Individual 

The  fitness  function  specifies  the  objective  to  our  genetic  algorithm.  We  define  the 
fitness of an individual as the degree of order amongst its genomes, i.e., the degree of order 
among the bytes of an array. If an individual has its genes in ascending order by value, then we 
attribute it to have a fitness of 1.0 (maximum), if an individual’s genes are randomly ordered, 
we attribute it to have a fitness of 0.0 (minimum). We calculate the fitness (the degree of order) 
of an array by counting the number of non-inversions prevalent in it. This count is normalized 
to span the range [0, 1]. Formally, 

Let an array, A be initialized with a set of n values. Let A(0), A(1), A(2),... A(n) be its 
elements. Now, if i < j and A(i) > A(j), then the pair of indices (i,j) is called an inversion of A. 
To get all non-inversions of the array, we execute the following: 

where 

and 

Where ‘#’ = number of elements. 
This count is normalized as follows: 

finally the fitness is reported on an exponential scale: 
Fitness = 
We choose an exponential scale in order to zoom-in to higher fitness values. 

Hardwired and Competent population 

In order to test the role of competency in evolution, we define two sets of populations 
to  evolve.  One  of  these  is  the  “Hardwired  population”  and  the  other  is  the  “Competent 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Population”.  A  key  differentiating  factor  between  the  two  is  the  ability  of  the  competent 
individuals to rearrange their cells. Consider two individuals in a particular generation: C1 from 
the  competent  population,  and  H1  from  the  Hardwired  population.  C1’s  cells  have  the 
phenotypic-capability  to  rearrange  themselves  by  assessing  their  position  relative  to  their 
neighbors. In contrast, H1’s cells do not have this trait (i.e., H1’s genome is hardwired). The 
result is that C1 can move its cells around to increase its fitness over the course of a generation, 
whereas H1 will always have the same fitness from birth to death. 

Competency 

Competent individuals are made of cells which are able to move around, with each cell 
working to improve the monotonicity of its local microenvironment. To do so, each cell of a 
competent individual looks at its right neighbor cell’s value to check if it is out-of-order. If so, 
it swaps its value. The swap is considered if and only if it increases fitness of the individual. In 
case the cell in question already finds itself in order with respect to its neighbors, then no swap 
occurs and we move onto the next cell. This process occurs sequentially from index 0 of the 
array to index N. Formally: 
 with 

swap 
In order to prevent each cell from swapping without limit, we add constraints on how 
much it can swap. These constraints are elaborated in the Results Section. 
Pseudocode for this process is as described below: 

, if 

Require: Competent_population (int), sc: user defined limit on swaps (int), ff: function 
to calculate fitness, nif: function to calculate number of non-inversions, cfs: function to 
check if a swap results in a fitness increase. 

For individual in competent_population: 

total_swaps_available = nif(individual) 
defecit_swaps = total_swaps_available - sc 
swapsToUse = choose total_swaps if deficit is -ve or SC if + ve 
counter = 0 
not_swapped = 0 
while  counter  <  swapsToUse  and  not_swapped  ≤ 
size(individual) -2: 

for cell_index in individual: 

if individual[cell_index] > individual[cell_index +1]: 

if cfs(individual, cell_index): 

swap and replace individual 
counter ++ 

else: 

not_swapped ++ 

else: 

not_swaped ++ 

if counter > swapsToUse or not_swapped >size(individual)-2: 

break 

return individuals 

Genetic algorithm 

In order to evolve populations, we iteratively pass them through four different stages 

(Fig. 1): 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
1.  Fitness Calculation: Fitness calculation occurs in slightly different ways based on the 
type  of  population  used.  A  hardwired  population  has  only  one  fitness:  the 
hardwired/genomic fitness. However, in a Competent Population, there are two types 
of  fitnesses  calculated:  the  hardwired/genomic  fitness  and  the  competent/apparent 
fitness.  The  competent  fitness  is  calculated  after  the  individual  has  phenotypically 
swapped its genes around to boost its fitness. 

2.  Selection:  This  stage  involves  selecting  for  the  fittest  10%  of  individuals  in  a 
population. This is done by calculating the fitness of all individuals in a population and 
choosing  the  top  10%.  For  a  hardwired  population,  selection  is  based  on  its 
hardwired/genomic fitness. Whereas, in a competent population selection is based on 
the competent fitness 

3.  Selection  in  the  competent  population  involves  an  important  aspect.  The  competent 
populations have a pre-swap stage during which they are analogous to have been “just-
born”. Post this, they are bestowed with the ability to swap their genes (phenotypically) 
and increase their fitness. Once they complete swapping they are considered to be at 
the  peak  of  their  lives  during  which  we  assume  selection  to  occur.  Therefore,  even 
though  selection  is  based  on  their  phenotypic  fitness,  it’s  the  genomes  of  these 
individuals which are being propagated into the next generation. 

4.  Cross-Over:  Post  selection,  the  fittest  10%  of  a  population  remain.  In  order  to 
repopulate it back to its original strength we carry out a process of reproduction called 
cross-over. It occurs as follows: Two individuals are involved, each of these are split at 
a random location along their length. One half of Individual 1 is swapped with the same 
half of Individual 2 to give rise to two children. Fig.1 contains an illustration of this 
process. 

5.  Mutation: Post Cross-over, a population is subjected to random mutations. Only point 
mutations occur, i.e., only a single structural gene of an individual in a population is set 
to  a  random  value  between  [1,  array_size].  We  set  the  probability  of  an  individual 
receiving a point mutation to be 0.6 
Fitnesses of the best individuals in their respective population are plot over time (i.e., 
generations). 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Results 

A minimal system for investigation of effects of cellular competency on evolution 

Intelligence (problem-solving and learning) takes place on multiple levels in biology, 
including at the level of cells [42] and at the level of populations [43-45]. We sought to construct 
and  analyze  a  minimal  model  in  which  developmental  competency  and  evolution  could  be 
studied together, so that the fundamental dynamics were revealed as clearly as possible without 
the complexity of real pathways and frozen accidents of biological evolution. Thus, we built a 
virtual embryogeny model in which fitness was defined by the degree of monotonicity of a 1D 
array  of  numbers,  simulating  a  minimal  metazoan  bodyplan  –  a  single  axis  of  positional 
information (Figure 1). The initial sequence of numbers for each organism was given by their 
genome. In “hardwired” individuals (Figure 1A), that sequence was exactly the sequence seen 
by the fitness function – their genome directly encoded their phenotype. We then implemented 
different degrees of competency during a developmental period in which cells were allowed 
some degree of movement relative to their neighbors (Figure 1B). The quality of the resulting 
gradient within each individual was evaluated after this period, enabling phenotypic fitness to 
diverge from raw, genotypic fitness (the fitness the animal would have had based purely on 
their  genome),  depending  on  how  much  cell  movement  was  permitted.  This  corresponds  to 
different degrees of capacity for cells to optimize homeostatically-preferred local conditions 
with respect to informational signals such as positional cues and polling of neighboring cell 
states  [46-54].  An  evolutionary  cycle  was  implemented  around  these  developmental  events 
(Figure 1C), where the top individuals in each generation were used as the founders of the next 
generation  [55,56].  This  enabled  study  of  the  dynamics  over  time  as  a  function  of  different 
degrees of cellular competency. In all plots, the shading around each line reports the variability 
across repeat runs of each experiment. 

Developmental competency accelerates evolutionary search 

We first compared the time-course of evolutionary search towards a fully-ordered axis 
in hardwired individuals (controls) vs. those with varying degrees of competency to rearrange 
their  cells  before  selection,  over  1000  generations  (Figure  2).  We  found  that  after  500 
generations,  the  hardwired  population  (with  no  swapping  capability)  had  the  least  fitness. 
Table.1  provides  a  summary  of  the  generation  number  at  which  each  population  crossed 
different  fitness  thresholds.  We  concluded  that  higher  number  of  allowed  swaps  (greater 
competency) led to the best performance, with 100 swaps being already maximal. It was also 
seen that the variance between repeat runs of each experiment (N=10) decreased with larger 
competency,  suggesting  that  more  competent  architectures  are  also  more  consistent  in  their 
performance over time. It is to be noted that hardwired individuals gradually improved to reach 
peak  fitness,  taking  well  over  1000  generations  to  do  so,  whereas  the  most  competent 
individuals did so in under 100 generations. Figure. 2 is an indication of the role competency 
plays in non-linearly improving the rate of fitness of a population. 

One specific example (competency = 100 swaps) is shown in Figure 3. Genotypic and 
phenotypic fitness of this population were similar for the first ~35 generations. But after that, 
the  competent  population  experienced  no  more  improvements  in  their  genome  (genotypic 
fitness  flattened  out).  By  this  time,  the  genome  was  already  so  good  that  100  swaps  could 
convert each embryo to a very good phenotypic fitness. Thus, competency enabled excellent 
performance but reduced the pressure on the genome, so that raw fitness was much lower than 
that of a hardwired agent (whose only chance for improvement was via genetic changes). 

Competent individuals take over mixed populations 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Given these tradeoffs, we next asked how mixed populations of a total of 200 competent 
and hardwired individuals would evolve (Figure 4). We performed experiments varying the 
degree of competence, and the proportion of each type of individual in the initial generation. 

At  a  low  competency  (20  swaps  allowed  per  individual’s  developmental  phase),  the 
competent populations could dominate only when their numbers were same or much higher 
than  those  of  hardwired  individuals.  As  a  minority  (10%),  they  persisted  but  did  not  out-
compete the hardwired ones. This was also true for competencies of 25 and 30 swaps. But, at 
a level of 31 swaps or above, they were able to dominate the population (although not drive the 
hardwired  ones  to  extinction)  within  just  a  few  generations,  even  when  starting  as  a  small 
minority  of  the  population.  Finally,  we  checked  the  competency  at  which  the  hardwired 
phenotype would be driven to extinction when the  competent are a minority (Figure 5). We 
found  that  a  competency  of  100  swaps  or  greater  was  required  to  drive  the  hardwired 
individuals to extinction. 

A summary of the relationship between competency values, ratio in which individuals 
were mixed and generation at which they dominated are shown in Table 2. We concluded that 
competency  was  a  dominant  strategy  and  even  at  very  low  prevalence,  the  population  was 
quickly taken over by such individuals. 

Evolution results in a high, constant level of competency 

The  prior  experiments  used  hardwired  values  for  the  number-of-swaps  available 
(competency) to the individuals of a population. In order to check what values would emerge 
during evolution where competency was itself an evolvable trait, we next set each individual’s 
competency  level  (#  of  swaps  permitted)  to  be  determined  by  a  gene  in  that  individual’s 
genome.  During  initialization,  functional  genes  of  all  individuals  were  set  randomly  to  low 
values in the range [0, 15]. However, during evolution we allowed each functional-gene to be 
mutated, potentially taking values across the range of [0, 400].  

To  determine  which  competency  levels  were  preferred  by  evolution,  we  tracked 
competency  gene  values  of  the  best  individual  over  all  1000  generations,  binned  them  into 
groups of 10, and then plotted the average value of each bin (Figure 6A). The prevalence of 
the  competency  allele  rapidly  rose,  meandering  during  the  evolutionary  process.  However, 
while evolution clearly explored the entire range of values (light green shading in 6A), it did 
not simply drive to maximize (400) competency – instead the optimal range was ~[250-300]. 
We provide a possible explanation for this surprising outcome in the Discussions section.  

The results of evolving a competent population with  variable competency over 1000 
generations are shown in Figure 6B: the populations quickly settled at consistent configurations 
in which phenotypic fitness and genotypic fitness diverged considerably. This is a fascinating 
outcome  because  it  suggests  that  a  certain  degree  of  competency  reduces  the  pressure  for 
improvements in the structural genome: once selection can no longer distinguish the quality of 
agents (because their high fitness could have been due to a great genome or to high competency 
repairing a terrible genome), it can only improve the population by increased competency, not 
by selecting better genetics.  

To  quantify  this  effect,  we  plotted  the  degree  of  correlation  between  genotypic  and 
phenotypic fitness in these populations (Figure 6C), to determine how well selection (which 
sees phenotypic fitness only) can really judge genotypes (necessary to let the best individuals 
sire the next generation in a survival of the fittest scheme). We observed that correlation very 
quickly dropped (within about 10 generations), meandering a bit but centered around 0. We 
concluded that the presence of evolving competency strongly broke the ability of selection to 
choose  the  best  genomes,  and  that  the  improvement  process  rapidly  became  dominated  by 
individuals who succeeded because of their developmental competencies, not because of their 
continuously-improving genomes. 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Discussion 

Evolution  is  driven  by  feedback  between  mutation  and  selection.  However,  these 
operate on two distinct aspects of individuals (genotype and phenotype), which are not in 1:1 
direct correspondence [57-62]. The genome and local environment can be seen as the input layer, 
while anatomical outcomes are the output layer, of a complex computational process traversed 
by  individuals  during  their  lifetime.    A  complex  layer  of  interactions  (morphogenesis)  sits 
between  the  specification  of  the  cellular  hardware  (the  genome)  and  the  resulting  form  and 
function that provides adaptive fitness. In effect, development is a set of “hidden layers” that 
may  provide  the  same  advantages  that  hidden  layers  provide  in  artificial  neural  network 
architectures over simple perceptrons.  

This  developmental  layer  has  been  discussed  in  an  evolutionary  context  among 
biologists  [63-68], and generative encodings have been used in the artificial  life/evolutionary 
algorithm communities [3,4,6-10,69-76]. Here, we focused on a specific and novel question: the 
implications,  for  the  rate  and  course  of  evolution,  of  a  developmental  process  that  exhibits 
competency at problem-solving [22,23]. This is an essential question because evolution builds 
with agential, not passive, materials: cells were once independent organisms themselves, and 
they did not lose their competencies when multicellularity arose [36,37,42]. Instead, their ability 
to  optimize  specific  variables,  communicate  with  others,  pursue  goals  in  diverse  problem 
spaces, learning capacity, etc. were harnessed toward larger-scale outcomes [77,78]. How might 
this affect evolvability and other aspects of the evolutionary process? 

We  produced  a  minimal  simulation  (Figure  1)  that  abstracted  away  many  biological 
details to focus on a simple architecture: a phenotype easily optimized by traditional genetic 
algorithms,  and  a  new  component:  competency  of  the  individual  cells  to  move,  based  on 
interactions with neighboring cells (simulating a single body axis morphogenetic gradient of 
positional information) [79-82]. The evolutionary algorithm basically performed a bubble sort 
[33], but with a new component: the individual elements of the set are not passive objects but 
have their own perspective and local goal (a specific relationship with neighbors based on their 
local properties, as cells are known to do [83-85]), and a limited competency to achieve that goal 
during  their  lifetime  journey  from  genotype  to  judgement  by  fitness  in  their  environment. 
Crucially, this was not a Lamarckian mechanism: each competent rearrangement was only in 
place “somatically” – for the lifetime of the organism, and did not pass on to its offspring, who 
inherited their parent’s genome and would have to apply whatever competency it could anew. 

Limitations of the study 

Our  framework  was  more  complete  than  many  evolutionary  simulations  because  it 
included  an  explicit  developmental  layer  between  the  genotype  and  phenotype.  It  was 
multiscale in the sense that there were actions taken by an evolutionary scale across individuals, 
but also by components of those individuals – the cells, which had their own perspective and 
local  goals.  However,  our  system  clearly  omitted  a  huge  amount  of  biological  detail  with 
respect to cellular mechanisms of sensing, competition, cooperation, etc.  Future work will add 
additional  realism  by  including  physiological  layers,  diverse  cell  types,  and  a  multi-
dimensional target morphology (e.g., 2D or 3D pattern instead of just one primary axis).  There 
is also much that can be improved with respect  to the specific mechanisms that cells use to 
implement their competency: a rich set of diverse genes will be added in the future to enable 
evolution to manipulate the different types of local goals and competencies. Moreover, recent 
discoveries in transgenerational inheritance [86-90] suggest that barrier between the genome and 
the phenotype is at least somewhat porous, and the effects of propagating sort order to offspring 
should  be  investigated.  Fundamentally  we  explored  a  toy  model  virtual  world  in  which  the 
individual roles of selection and competency could be quantitatively dissected in the absence 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
of  confounding  complexity  –  we  sought  generic  laws  [91-94],  not  a  simulation  of  any  one 
biological species. 

The role of cellular competency in evolution 

We found that providing cells with a minimal homeostatic competency with respect to 
improving their position in the virtual embryo results in better performance of the evolutionary 
search. Populations reach better fitness values, faster, when their cells are able to make up for 
deficiencies in their genomes (Figure 2). Indeed, in mixed populations, competent individuals 
tend  to  dominate  and  rapidly  take  over  (Figure  4),  as  long  as  they  have  a  minimal  level  of 
competency (Figure 5). The simulation highlighted the distinction between two properties of 
each individual that are often conflated or obscured in simulations that don’t include an explicit 
competency  step:  genotypic  vs.  phenotypic  fitness.  Phenotypic  fitness  is  the  actual 
environmental  performance  that  selection  act  upon.  Genotypic  fitness  is  the  raw  fitness  the 
individual  would  have,  if  it  had  no  competence;  selection  does  not  see  genotypic  fitness 
directly. Indeed, biology has many examples of evolution’s attempts to gauge genomes that it 
cannot  see  directly,  for  example  by  fluctuating  asymmetry  [95,96]  and  the  near  universal 
standards  of  sexual  selection  for  left-right  symmetrical  features  (which  in  turn  is  correlated 
with lack of genetic damage) [97-99]. 

 In  this  system,  we  see  that  competency  results  in  good  phenotypic  fitness  but  takes 

pressure off of genotypic fitness, which settles at a sub-optimal level (Figure 3). 

Perhaps the most interesting aspect was the role that competency plays in exacerbating 
the  inability  of  selection  to  evaluate  the  genetic  material  that  gets  passed  on  to  subsequent 
generations. We observed that increases in competency made it harder and harder for selection 
to  pick  the  best  genomes,  because  well-performing  individuals  could  have  done  so  either 
because  their  genomes  were  high-quality  or  because  their  high  competency  made  up  for  a 
deficient genome. Specifically, the correlation between genotypic and phenotypic fitness drops 
to insignificant levels very rapidly (Figure 6C).  This could be expected to result in complex 
dynamics  because  competency  helps  fitness  of  individuals  but  impairs  the  ability  of  the 
evolutionary process itself to capitalize on the hill-climbing search in fitness space by picking 
out the most elite genomes for mating in each generation (propagate improvements in genomes, 
which it can no longer clearly evaluate). Thus, we studied what happens when evolution also 
is  allowed  to  control  the  degree  of  competency,  which  is  biologically  realistic  as  cellular 
capacities for sensing, computation, and action are themselves under evolutionary selection. 

Surprisingly, we observed that the population does not, in the long term, drive towards 
maximizing competency (Figure 6A). It settles on a high value, but not one that is enough to 
produce  a  perfect  phenotype  from  any  genome  whatsoever.  When  allowed  to  set  the 
competency  level  freely,  evolution  produced  phenotypically-perfect  individuals  but  the 
genome remained slightly above 80% in quality, showing how competency and genome quality 
trade off at an equilibrium point (Figure 6B). We propose the following explanation.  

Initially when evolution begins, a high gene value is required to create individuals with 
high fitness. At generation 40 or so, a high fitness is achieved by choosing high gene values 
over gene values. Post generation 50, the genotypic fitness has reached a stable value around 
0.8. Theoretically, a competency value of 125 would be adequate to reach peak fitness from 
this point onwards. Because of this, evolution can get away by selecting a competency-gene 
greater than or equal to 125. Any value above 125 will ensure that peak fitness is reached. As 
a result, there is no selection pressure for evolution to pick the maximum possible competency 
value (400 in our system). There would be no advantage in choosing a competency value of 
400  over  126.  They  are  perceived  as  equal  by  the  selection  process.  Further,  there  exists  a 
random  component  to  selection  of  gene  values  above  125.  Two  individuals,  one  with 
competency value 125 and another with competency value 400, will both have a phenotypic 

11 

 
 
 
 
fitness of 1.0 (maximum). In our experiments, if >10% of the population have a fitness of 1.0 
before selection, we pick the first 10%. This process of selection can lead to random competent 
genes being selected. Nonetheless they are well above 125, as seen in Fig.6A. 

The paradox of robustness: why the animal with the worst genome has the best anatomy 

The  competency  of  a  population  can  be  seen  as  granting  robustness  against 
perturbations, i.e.  competency resolves aberrations in the genome and lessens the burden on 
evolution. The role of robustness in evolution has been a popular topic of discussion [100-104]. 
A population’s robustness is hypothesized to cause an evolutionary reduction in the adaptive 
performance of the population; a sort of maladaptation caused when improved robustness-traits 
layer on top of one another over evolutionary time and hide the underlying adaptive traits. This 
paradox has been shown to have broad implications on organismal design and is supposed to 
be a key aspect of evolution. Our results are in line with this paradox. Fig. 3 is a clear depiction 
of  the  role  robustness  plays  in  hindering  the  quality  of  the  genome.  At  each  generation, 
competency adds a layer of robustness which otherwise would have been exposed to evolution. 
Over evolutionary time, these robustness layers contribute collectively to worsen the genomes. 
When compared to a population with no competency (hardwired), competent genomes stabilize 
to  a  mediocre  value  whereas  the  untampered  hardwired  genomes  rise  steadily  to  maximum 
fitness.  However,  it  must  be  noted  that  this  is  not  necessarily  a  disadvantage.  The  paradox 
reveals the efficiency of Competency: Genomes need not be perfect; a stable value is all that 
is required for competency to boost an individual’s fitness to maximum. Genetic information 
and problem-solving capacity of the cells work together to achieve a perfect solution to this 
fitness function. 

There  is  a  remarkable  example  of  biology  that  is  uniquely  explained  by  the  above 
dynamics[105].  Some  species  of  planarian  flatworms  reproduce  by  fission  and  regeneration, 
which  means  that  they  exhibit  somatic  inheritance:  any  mutation  that  doesn’t  kill  a  cell  is 
propagated into the next generation [87,106]. For hundreds of millions of years, these animals 
have  accumulated  genetic  diversity  and  in  fact  single  animals  can  be  mixoploid  [107,108], 
having different numbers of chromosomes. And yet, they regenerate perfectly after being cut 
into  pieces,  and  do  not  age  –  they  are  champions  of  anatomical  control.  We  propose  that 
planaria are an example of runaway competency: when cells get really good at making up for 
genetic deficiencies, evolution has such a hard time selecting for the best genomes that further 
improvements concern the competency to reach their target morphology.  

This is seen to some extent in other species; for example, human embryos are tolerant 
to being cut in half at early stages, creating monozygotic twins. However, in planaria the effect 
was  apparently  much  stronger.  We  propose  this  also  as  an  explanation  for  another  curious 
aspect of planaria. In every other model species, mutant lines are available  – fruit flies with 
different number of wings or color of eyes, mice with abnormal tails, and many more genetic 
strains  that  are  available  from  stock  centers.  In  planaria  this  does  not  exist  –  no 
morphologically-abnormal genetic strains have been reported. We suggest that this is because 
the cells have gotten so good at producing normal worms regardless of genetic changes, they 
automatically resist mutagenic effects that would normally found a new morphotype. In fact 
the only available abnormal line of planaria is a permanently two-headed form [109-111], which 
was produced not genetically but by manipulating bioelectrical signaling – the modality that is 
used to coordinate cellular competency [112-114], as is predicted by our model for species like 
planaria. Given their resistance to mutation, it’s unclear how speciation in planaria happens, 
but  it  should  be  noted  that  the  same  bioelectrical  strategy  that  controls  computation  and 
cognition (i.e., behavioral competencies) in brains has been shown to coax genetically wild-
type planaria to grow the heads appropriate to other species [115,116].  

12 

 
 
 
 
Where the hard work is done: an intelligence ratchet 

In planaria, most of the evolutionary “effort” seems to have gone in to perfecting the 
algorithm  (the  ability  of  cells  to  create  a  normal  worm  morphology),  vs.  keeping  a  clean 
genome, because of the vicious cycle of competency increases. We observed this in our model, 
asking where evolution was doing the work, once rising competency levels made it difficult to 
select the  best  genomes.   We  hypothesized  that  the  process of  evolution  would  spend  more 
time  optimizing  the  competency  gene  than  any  structural  gene.  To  test  this  prediction,  we 
tracked the amount of changes over evolutionary time that appear in “structural” genes vs. the 
competency gene (Figure 7), noting that the competency gene is changed significantly more 
often than any structural gene. When gains can no longer be efficiently made by tweaking the 
genome (once selection cannot reliably pick out the good genotypes), all the effort goes in to 
increasing the competency level.  

This  suggests  the  existence  of  a  powerful  ratchet  mechanism  in  which  evolution 
progressively becomes locked in to improvements in the intelligence of the agential material 
with which it works, with reduced pressure on the structural genes. A positive feedback loop 
in  which  evolution  increasingly  puts  more  effort  into  the  developmental  software  than 
perfecting the hardware points to a possible drive for scaling intelligence in morphological and 
other spaces  [37,39,117-120]. It is possible that a drive for increased competency  is an ancient 
and  ubiquitous  pressure  [121],  which  plays  out  to  different  degrees  in  different  biological 
lineages based on other aspects of their environmental and reproductive hyper-parameters.  

Conclusion 

These  results  suggest  a  diverse  research  program  in  research  on  the  evolutionary 
interplay between biological hardware (genomically-determined protein components in each 
cell) and software (multi-cellular physiological dynamics that control growth and form). We 
suggest  that  the  field  of  basal  cognition  is  an  important  part  of  understanding  evolutionary 
developmental  biology  [57-59,77,78],  and  that  intelligence  (problem-solving  competency)  an 
evolutionary driver long before complex brains and muscle-driven behavior arise [36,37,40,122-
129].  Beyond  understanding  natural  evolution,  we  suggest  that  the  design  of  autonomous 
robotics [130,131], synthetic life [132], and interventions for regenerative medicine [133] can all 
benefit from exploiting  the multiscale  competency  architecture so richly  exhibited by living 
forms. 

Acknowledgements 

We thank: Chris Fields, Steven Frank, Hananel Hazan, Santosh Manicka, and Richard 
Watson for helpful discussions, and Julia Poirier for assistance with the manuscript preparation. 
M.L. gratefully acknowledges support via John Templeton Foundation grant 62212. 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figures and Legends 

Figure 1: Schematic of experimental setup.  

A: Description of how a hardwired individual is defined: Each Hardwired individual is a 1-D 
array consisting of N cells (10 shown here). Each cell takes an integer value between [1, N], and is 
considered to be its “Structural Gene” (Genotype). The fitness of an individual depends on the degree 

14 

 
 
 
of order within its genes (0 implying no order and 1 implying ascending order). In the example shown, 
the individual is randomly initialized and hence has a fitness close to 0.  

B: Description of how a competent individual is defined: Each competent individual is identical 
to  a  Hardwired  individual  except  that  it  has  the  ability  (phenotypic)  to  move  its  cells  around  (in  a 
constrained manner) to achieve ordered arrangement (ascending). Each competent individual carries a 
functional  gene.  The  functional  gene  can  be  locked  down  to  a  pre-specified  value  or  can  be  made 
evolvable. 

C: Description of the genetic algorithm used to evolve Hardwired and Competent individuals: 
Step1- Populations of HW and Competent individuals are initialized with random cell values. Fitnesses 
of the HW individuals are computed. Competent individuals are allowed to rearrange their cells and 
fitnesses are calculated post-rearrangement.  
Step2: Top 10% of the fittest individuals (genotypes) in both populations are selected. 
Step3: The selected individuals are used to reproduce and re-populate their respective populations. 
Step4: With a small probability, individuals of a population have a single cell-value (gene) flipped to a 
random number between [1, N] 
Step 4 marks the end of a generation. A new generation begins once again with selection (step: 2). This 
cycle repeats until populations reach a fitness of 0.99 at which their genotypes would have near-perfect 
order. 

15 

 
 
 
Figure 2. Competent individuals have a higher rate of fitness than their Hardwired counterparts.  

In each generation the individual with the maximum fitness is shown. Competent populations 
are initialized with the ability to swap in a constrained manner (0/20/100/400 swaps per generation). 
Individuals with a higher competency level reach higher values of fitness faster. Shaded area depicts 
variance over 10 runs. 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Competency comes at the expense of reduced genotypic fitness. 

Fitnesses of the best individual in a Competent Population (with competency =100) is compared 

with that of a hardwired population over time. Shaded area represents variance over 10 runs. 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Competent individuals can dominate over hardwired individuals in a mixed setting only when 
given a minimum level of competency.  

Prevalence of hardwired and competent individuals for different mixture proportions at various 
competency levels. Each column represents a different proportion of hardwired (HW) and Competent 
individuals  mixed  together  for  evolution  within  a  hybrid  population.  Each  row  shows  data  from 
experiments at  different competency  levels  (#  of  swaps permitted). Shaded area represents  variance 
over 20 repeat runs of each experiment.  

18 

 
 
 
Figure 5: A competency of 100 or greater is required for the competent to drive hardwired to extinction 
when being a minority of the population.  

Prevalence of a mixture of hardwired and competent individuals when competent individuals 
are a minority (180 hardwired to 20 competent ) at different competency levels. Shaded area represents 
variance over 15 runs. 

19 

 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Competency does not require a perfect genome to boost fitness.  

A: Competency-gene value chosen over the course of evolution (shown as average values over 
sequences of 10 generations). Shaded area represents the range of competency values in the population. 
B:  Fitness  of  the  best  individual  in  a  population  of  competent  individuals  with  evolvable 
competency.  Shaded  area  represents  variance  over  10  runs.  C:  Correlation  of  the  genotypic  and 
phenotypic values of the population (shown as average values over sequences of 10 generations). 

20 

 
 
Figure 7: Evolution spends a greater proportion of time tweaking the competency gene  compared to 
any structural gene 

A: Frequency of changes averaged over time. Error bars represent standard deviation over 10 
runs. The competency gene is clearly modified at a greater rate per generation than any structural gene.  
B: Number of changes made to structural genes versus the competency gene over evolutionary 
time. Average value of change frequency in 50 structural genes are compared to those of the competency 
gene. The graph is cumulative in nature, i.e., the number of changes made in the previous generation 
carry forward to the next. Shaded area represents variance over 10 repeat runs. 

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Tables 

Competency 
Level \ Fitness 

No Competency 
(Hardwired) 

Level 20 

Level 100 

Level 400 

0.65 

0.75 

0.80 

0.90 

0.97 

1.00 

9 

9 

3 

1 

18 

19 

8 

5 

25 

25 

11 

8 

52 

44 

21 

18 

359 

>1000 

92 

38 

35 

>1000 

156 

90 

Table 1: The number of generations different competent populations take to break through a particular 
fitness-threshold. The table indicates the magnitude of assistance provided by competency to evolution. 

Competency Level \ 
Mixture Proportion 

20 HW: 180 
Competent 

100 HW: 100 
Competent 

180 HW : 20 
Competent 

Level 20 

Level 25 

Level 30 

Level 35 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

∞ 

5  

4 

3 

Table 2: Details of how many  generations competent individuals take to dominate (i.e., whenever a 
population  is  >  50%  of  the  mixture)  over  hardwired  individuals  when  mixed  together  in  different 
proportions. 

22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References Cited 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

Huizinga, J.; Stanley, K.O.; Clune, J. The Emergence of Canalization and 
Evolvability in an Open-Ended, Interactive Evolutionary System. Artif Life 2018, 24, 
157-181, doi:10.1162/artl_a_00263. 
Cheney, N.; Bongard, J.C.; Lipson, H. Evolving Soft Robots in Tight Spaces. In 
Proceedings of the Gecco'15: Proceedings of the 2015 Genetic and Evolutionary 
Computation Conference, Madrid, Spain, 2015; pp. 935-942. 
Auerbach, J.E.; Bongard, J.C. Evolving Complete Robots with CPPN-NEAT: The 
Utility of Recurrent Connections. Gecco-2011: Proceedings of the 13th Annual 
Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference 2011, 1475-1482. 
Clune, J.; Beckmann, B.E.; Ofria, C.; Pennock, R.T. Evolving Coordinated 
Quadruped Gaits with the HyperNEAT Generative Encoding. 2009 Ieee Congress on 
Evolutionary Computation, Vols 1-5 2009, 2764-2771, doi:Doi 
10.1109/Cec.2009.4983289. 
Lai, G.; Leymarie, F.F.; Latham, W.; Arita, T.; Suzuki, R. Virtual Creature 
Morphology - A Review. Computer Graphics Forum 2021, 40, 659-681, 
doi:10.1111/cgf.142661. 
Miller, J.F. Evolving a Self-Repairing, Self-Regulating, French Flag Organism. 
Berlin, Heidelberg, 2004; pp. 129-139. 
Hampton, A.N.; Adami, C. Evolution of robust developmental neural networks. 
Artificial Life IX 2004, 438-443. 
Stanley, K.O.; Miikkulainen, R. A taxonomy for artificial embryogeny. Artif. Life 
2003, 9, 93-130. 
Miller, J.F. Evolving developmental programs for adaptation, morphogenesis, and 
self-repair. Lect Notes Artif Int 2003, 2801, 256-265. 
Astor, J.C.; Adami, C. A developmental model for the evolution of artificial neural 
networks. Artif. Life 2000, 6, 189-218. 
Gruau, F. Genetic Synthesis of Modular Neural Networks. In Proceedings of the 
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Genetic Algorithms, ICGA-93, 
1993; pp. 318--325. 
Gruau, F. Cellular encoding of Genetic Neural Networks; Laboratoire de 
l'Informatique du Parallilisme: 1992. 
Kitano, H. Designing neural networks using genetic algorithms with a graph 
generation system. Complex Sys 1990, 4, 461-476. 
Levin, M.; Pietak, A.M.; Bischof, J. Planarian regeneration as a model of anatomical 
homeostasis: Recent progress in biophysical and computational approaches. Semin 
Cell Dev Biol 2019, 87, 125-144, doi:10.1016/j.semcdb.2018.04.003. 
Levin, M. Collective Intelligence of Morphogenesis as a Teleonomic Process. in 
review 2022. 
Harris, A.K. The need for a concept of shape homeostasis. Biosystems 2018, 173, 65-
72, doi:10.1016/j.biosystems.2018.09.012. 
Oviedo, N.J.; Beane, W.S. Regeneration: The origin of cancer or a possible cure? 
Semin Cell Dev Biol 2009, 20, 557-564. 
Lobo, D.; Solano, M.; Bubenik, G.A.; Levin, M. A linear-encoding model explains 
the variability of the target morphology in regeneration. J R Soc Interface 2014, 11, 
20130918, doi:10.1098/rsif.2013.0918. 

19.  Mathews, J.; Levin, M. The body electric 2.0: recent advances in developmental 

bioelectricity for regenerative and synthetic bioengineering. Curr Opin Biotechnol 
2018, 52, 134-144, doi:10.1016/j.copbio.2018.03.008. 

23 

 
 
20. 

21. 

22. 

23. 

24. 

25. 

26. 

27. 

28. 

29. 

30. 

31. 

32. 

33. 

34. 

35. 

36. 

Levin, M. The wisdom of the body: future techniques and approaches to 
morphogenetic fields in regenerative medicine, developmental biology and cancer. 
Regen Med 2011, 6, 667-673, doi:10.2217/rme.11.69. 
Davies, J.; Levin, M. Synthetic morphology via active and agential matter. preprint 
2022, doi:10.31219/osf.io/xrv8h. 
Fields, C.; Levin, M. Competency in Navigating Arbitrary Spaces as an Invariant for 
Analyzing Cognition in Diverse Embodiments. Entropy (Basel) 2022, 24, 
doi:10.3390/e24060819. 
Clawson, W.P.; Levin, M. Endless Forms Most Beautiful: teleonomy and the 
bioengineering of chimeric and synthetic organisms. Biological Journal of the 
Linnean Society 2022, in press. 
Birnbaum, K.D.; Sanchez Alvarado, A. Slicing across kingdoms: regeneration in 
plants and animals. Cell 2008, 132, 697-710, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2008.01.040. 
Vandenberg, L.N.; Adams, D.S.; Levin, M. Normalized shape and location of 
perturbed craniofacial structures in the Xenopus tadpole reveal an innate ability to 
achieve correct morphology. Dev Dyn 2012, 241, 863-878, doi:10.1002/dvdy.23770. 
Pinet, K.; McLaughlin, K.A. Mechanisms of physiological tissue remodeling in 
animals: Manipulating tissue, organ, and organism morphology. Dev Biol 2019, 451, 
134-145, doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2019.04.001. 
Pinet, K.; Deolankar, M.; Leung, B.; McLaughlin, K.A. Adaptive correction of 
craniofacial defects in pre-metamorphic Xenopus laevis tadpoles involves thyroid 
hormone-independent tissue remodeling. Development 2019, 146, 
doi:10.1242/dev.175893. 
Kriegman, S.; Blackiston, D.; Levin, M.; Bongard, J. Kinematic self-replication in 
reconfigurable organisms. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2021, 118, 
doi:10.1073/pnas.2112672118. 
Blackiston, D.; Lederer, E.; Kriegman, S.; Garnier, S.; Bongard, J.; Levin, M. A 
cellular platform for the development of synthetic living machines. Sci Robot 2021, 6, 
eabf1571, doi:10.1126/scirobotics.abf1571. 
Kriegman, S.; Blackiston, D.; Levin, M.; Bongard, J. A scalable pipeline for 
designing reconfigurable organisms. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2020, 117, 1853-1859, 
doi:10.1073/pnas.1910837117. 
Niehrs, C. On growth and form: a Cartesian coordinate system of Wnt and BMP 
signaling specifies bilaterian body axes. Development 2010, 137, 845-857, 
doi:10.1242/dev.039651. 
Frankel, J. Positional information in cells and organisms. Trends Cell Biol 1992, 2, 
256-260, doi:096289249290191O [pii]. 
Astrachan, O. Bubble sort: an archaeological algorithmic analysis. ACM SIGCSE 
Bulletin 2003, 35, 1-5. 
Jablonka, E.; Lamb, M.J.; Avital, E. 'Lamarckian' mechanisms in darwinian evolution. 
Trends Ecol. Evol. 1998, 13, 206-210, doi:10.1016/S0169-5347(98)01344-5. 
Jablonka, E.; Lamb, M.J.; Zeligowski, A. Evolution in four dimensions : genetic, 
epigenetic, behavioral, and symbolic variation in the history of life, Revised edition 
ed.; A Bradford Book, The MIT Press: Cambridge, Massachusetts ; London, England, 
2014; pp. xii, 563 pages. 
Lyon, P.; Keijzer, F.; Arendt, D.; Levin, M. Reframing cognition: getting down to 
biological basics. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2021, 376, 20190750, 
doi:10.1098/rstb.2019.0750. 

24 

 
37. 

38. 

39. 

40. 

41. 

42. 

43. 

Levin, M.; Keijzer, F.; Lyon, P.; Arendt, D. Uncovering cognitive similarities and 
differences, conservation and innovation. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2021, 
376, 20200458, doi:10.1098/rstb.2020.0458. 
Lyon, P. Of what is “minimal cognition” the half-baked version? Adaptive Behavior 
2019, 28, 407-424, doi:10.1177/1059712319871360. 
Lyon, P. The cognitive cell: bacterial behavior reconsidered. Front Microbiol 2015, 6, 
264, doi:10.3389/fmicb.2015.00264. 
Keijzer, F.; van Duijn, M.; Lyon, P. What nervous systems do: early evolution, input-
output, and the skin brain thesis. Adapt Behav 2013, 21, 67-85, doi:Doi 
10.1177/1059712312465330. 
Lyon, P. The biogenic approach to cognition. Cogn Process 2006, 7, 11-29, 
doi:10.1007/s10339-005-0016-8. 
Baluška, F.; Levin, M. On Having No Head: Cognition throughout Biological 
Systems. Front Psychol 2016, 7, 902, doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00902. 
Kouvaris, K.; Clune, J.; Kounios, L.; Brede, M.; Watson, R.A. How evolution learns 
to generalise: Using the principles of learning theory to understand the evolution of 
developmental organisation. PLoS computational biology 2017, 13, e1005358, 
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005358. 

44.  Watson, R.A.; Szathmary, E. How Can Evolution Learn? Trends Ecol Evol 2016, 31, 

45. 

46. 

47. 

48. 

49. 

50. 

51. 

52. 

53. 

54. 

55. 

147-157, doi:10.1016/j.tree.2015.11.009. 
Power, D.A.; Watson, R.A.; Szathmary, E.; Mills, R.; Powers, S.T.; Doncaster, C.P.; 
Czapp, B. What can ecosystems learn? Expanding evolutionary ecology with learning 
theory. Biol Direct 2015, 10, 69, doi:10.1186/s13062-015-0094-1. 
Deisboeck, T.S.; Couzin, I.D. Collective behavior in cancer cell populations. 
BioEssays 2009, 31, 190-197, doi:10.1002/bies.200800084. 
Jain, N.G.; Wong, E.A.; Aranyosi, A.J.; Boneschansker, L.; Markmann, J.F.; Briscoe, 
D.M.; Irimia, D. Microfluidic mazes to characterize T-cell exploration patterns 
following activation in vitro. Integr Biol (Camb) 2015, 7, 1423-1431, 
doi:10.1039/c5ib00146c. 
Sarris, M.; Sixt, M. Navigating in tissue mazes: chemoattractant interpretation in 
complex environments. Curr Opin Cell Biol 2015, 36, 93-102, 
doi:10.1016/j.ceb.2015.08.001. 
Tweedy, L.; Thomason, P.A.; Paschke, P.I.; Martin, K.; Machesky, L.M.; Zagnoni, 
M.; Insall, R.H. Seeing around corners: Cells solve mazes and respond at a distance 
using attractant breakdown. Science 2020, 369, doi:10.1126/science.aay9792. 
Tweedy, L.; Knecht, D.A.; Mackay, G.M.; Insall, R.H. Self-Generated 
Chemoattractant Gradients: Attractant Depletion Extends the Range and Robustness 
of Chemotaxis. PLoS Biol 2016, 14, e1002404, doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1002404. 
Shellard, A.; Mayor, R. Collective durotaxis along a self-generated stiffness gradient 
in vivo. Nature 2021, 600, 690-694, doi:10.1038/s41586-021-04210-x. 
SenGupta, S.; Parent, C.A.; Bear, J.E. The principles of directed cell migration. Nat 
Rev Mol Cell Biol 2021, 22, 529-547, doi:10.1038/s41580-021-00366-6. 
Friston, K.; Levin, M.; Sengupta, B.; Pezzulo, G. Knowing one's place: a free-energy 
approach to pattern regulation. J R Soc Interface 2015, 12, 
doi:10.1098/rsif.2014.1383. 
Kuchling, F.; Friston, K.; Georgiev, G.; Levin, M. Morphogenesis as Bayesian 
inference: A variational approach to pattern formation and control in complex 
biological systems. Phys Life Rev 2020, 33, 88-108, doi:10.1016/j.plrev.2019.06.001. 
Goldberg, D.E. Genetic algorithms in search, optimization, and machine learning; 
Addison-Wesley Pub. Co.: Reading, Mass., 1989; pp. xiii, 412. 

25 

 
56.  Mitchell, M. An introduction to genetic algorithms; MIT Press: Cambridge, Mass., 

57. 

58. 
59. 

60. 

61. 

62. 

63. 

64. 

1996; pp. viii, 205. 
Goodwin, B.C. On some relationships between embryogenesis and cognition. Theoria 
to Theory 1976, 10, 33-44. 
Goodwin, B.C. Cognitive Biology. Commun Cognition 1977, 10, 87-91. 
Goodwin, B.C. A cognitive view of biological process. J. Social Biol. Struct. 1978, 1, 
117-125. 
Goodwin, B.C. Development and evolution. J Theor Biol 1982, 97, 43-55, doi:0022-
5193(82)90275-2 [pii]. 
Goodwin, B.C. Developing organisms as self-organizing fields. In Mathematical 
Essays on Growth and the Emergence of Form, Antonelli, P.L., Ed.; University of 
Alberta Press: Alberta, 1985. 
Goodwin, B.C. How the leopard changed its spots : the evolution of complexity; 
Charles Scribner's Sons: New York, 1994; pp. xvi, 252 p. 
Gerhart, J.; Kirschner, M. Cells, embryos, and evolution : toward a cellular and 
developmental understanding of phenotypic variation and evolutionary adaptability; 
Blackwell Science: Boston, 1997; pp. xiii, 642 , 616 of plates. 
Gilbert, S.F.; Opitz, J.M.; Raff, R.A. Resynthesizing evolutionary and developmental 
biology. Dev Biol 1996, 173, 357-372, doi:10.1006/dbio.1996.0032. 

65.  Wolpert, L. The evolutionary origin of development: cycles, patterning, privilege and 

66. 

67. 

continuity. Development Supplement 1994, Supplement, 79-84. 
Cherdantsev, V.G.; Scobeyeva, V.A. The morphological basis of self-organization. 
Developmental and evolutionary aspects. Riv Biol 1994, 87, 57-85. 
Raff, R.A.; Kaufman, T.C. Embryos, genes, and evolution : the developmental-genetic 
basis of evolutionary change; Indiana University Press: Bloomington, 1991; pp. xxvi, 
395. 

68.  Watson, R.A.; Wagner, G.P.; Pavlicev, M.; Weinreich, D.M.; Mills, R. The evolution 

of phenotypic correlations and "developmental memory". Evolution 2014, 68, 1124-
1138, doi:10.1111/evo.12337. 
Andersen, T.; Newman, R.; Otter, T. Shape homeostasis in virtual embryos. Artif. Life 
2009, 15, 161-183. 
Stanley, K.O. Compositional pattern producing networks: A novel abstraction of 
development. Genet Program Evol M 2007, 8, 131-162, doi:10.1007/s10710-007-
9028-8. 
Bentley, P.; Kumar, S. Three ways to grow designs: A comparison of embryogenies 
for an evolutionary design problem. Gecco-99: Proceedings of the Genetic and 
Evolutionary Computation Conference 1999, 35-43. 
Furusawa, C.; Kaneko, K. Emergence of multicellular organisms with dynamic 
differentiation and spatial pattern. Artif. Life 1998, 4, 79-93. 
Gerlee, P.; Basanta, D.; Anderson, A.R.A. The Influence of Cellular Characteristics 
on the Evolution of Shape Homeostasis. Artificial Life 2017, 23, 424-448, 
doi:10.1162/ARTL_a_00240. 
Gerlee, P.; Basanta, D.; Anderson, A.R.A. The impact of cellular characteristics on 
the evolution of shape homeostasis. ArXiv e-prints 2015, 1512. 
Gerlee, P.; Basanta, D.; Anderson, A.R. Evolving homeostatic tissue using genetic 
algorithms. Progress in biophysics and molecular biology 2011, 106, 414-425, 
doi:10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2011.03.004. 
Basanta, D.; Miodownik, M.; Baum, B. The evolution of robust development and 
homeostasis in artificial organisms. PLoS computational biology 2008, 4, e1000030. 

69. 

70. 

71. 

72. 

73. 

74. 

75. 

76. 

26 

 
77. 

78. 

79. 

80. 

81. 
82. 

83. 

84. 

85. 

86. 

87. 

88. 

89. 

90. 

91. 

92. 

93. 

94. 

95. 

Levin, M. Life, death, and self: Fundamental questions of primitive cognition viewed 
through the lens of body plasticity and synthetic organisms. Biochemical and 
Biophysical Research Communications 2020, 564, 114-133, 
doi:10.1016/j.bbrc.2020.10.077. 
Levin, M. The Computational Boundary of a “Self”: Developmental Bioelectricity 
Drives Multicellularity and Scale-Free Cognition. Front Psychol 2019, 10, 2688, 
doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02688. 
Cox, B.N.; Snead, M.L. Cells as strain-cued automata. Journal of the Mechanics and 
Physics of Solids 2016, 87, 177-226, doi:10.1016/j.jmps.2015.11.002. 
Endo, T.; Bryant, S.V.; Gardiner, D.M. A stepwise model system for limb 
regeneration. Dev Biol 2004, 270, 135-145. 
Davies, J.A. Mechanisms of morphogenesis. 2013, 1 online resource (ix, 403 pages). 
Chandebois, R. Cell sociology: a way of reconsidering the current concepts of 
morphogenesis. Acta biotheoretica 1976, 25, 71-102. 
Ellison, D.; Mugler, A.; Brennan, M.D.; Lee, S.H.; Huebner, R.J.; Shamir, E.R.; Woo, 
L.A.; Kim, J.; Amar, P.; Nemenman, I.; et al. Cell-cell communication enhances the 
capacity of cell ensembles to sense shallow gradients during morphogenesis. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
2016, 113, E679-E688, doi:10.1073/pnas.1516503113. 
Haass, N.K.; Smalley, K.S.; Li, L.; Herlyn, M. Adhesion, migration and 
communication in melanocytes and melanoma. Pigment Cell Res 2005, 18, 150-159. 
Casas-Tinto, S.; Torres, M.; Moreno, E. The flower code and cancer development. 
Clin Transl Oncol 2011, 13, 5-9, doi:10.1007/s12094-011-0610-4. 
Houri-Zeevi, L.; Rechavi, O. A Matter of Time: Small RNAs Regulate the Duration 
of Epigenetic Inheritance. Trends Genet 2017, 33, 46-57, 
doi:10.1016/j.tig.2016.11.001. 
Neuhof, M.; Levin, M.; Rechavi, O. Vertically- and horizontally-transmitted 
memories - the fading boundaries between regeneration and inheritance in planaria. 
Biol Open 2016, 5, 1177-1188, doi:10.1242/bio.020149. 
Rechavi, O.; Houri-Ze'evi, L.; Anava, S.; Goh, W.S.; Kerk, S.Y.; Hannon, G.J.; 
Hobert, O. Starvation-induced transgenerational inheritance of small RNAs in C. 
elegans. Cell 2014, 158, 277-287, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2014.06.020. 
Rechavi, O. Guest list or black list: heritable small RNAs as immunogenic memories. 
Trends Cell Biol 2014, 24, 212-220, doi:10.1016/j.tcb.2013.10.003. 
Anava, S.; Posner, R.; Rechavi, O. The soft genome. Worm 2014, 3, e989798, 
doi:10.4161/21624054.2014.989798. 
Roli, A.; Kauffman, S.A. Emergence of Organisms. Entropy-Switz 2020, 22, 
doi:10.3390/e22101163. 
Graudenzi, A.; Serra, R.; Villani, M.; Damiani, C.; Colacci, A.; Kauffman, S.A. 
Dynamical properties of a boolean model of gene regulatory network with memory. J. 
Comput. Biol. 2011, 18, 1291-1303, doi:10.1089/cmb.2010.0069. 
Graudenzi, A.; Serra, R.; Villani, M.; Colacci, A.; Kauffman, S.A. Robustness 
analysis of a Boolean model of gene regulatory network with memory. J. Comput. 
Biol. 2011, 18, 559-577, doi:10.1089/cmb.2010.0224. 
Kauffman, S.A. The origins of order : self organization and selection in evolution; 
Oxford University Press: New York, 1993; pp. xviii, 709. 
Dongen, S.V. Fluctuating asymmetry and developmental instability in evolutionary 
biology: past, present and future. J Evol Biol 2006, 19, 1727-1743, 
doi:10.1111/j.1420-9101.2006.01175.x. 

27 

 
96. 

97. 

98. 

99. 

Lens, L.; Van Dongen, S.; Kark, S.; Matthysen, E. Fluctuating asymmetry as an 
indicator of fitness: can we bridge the gap between studies? Biol Rev Camb Philos 
Soc 2002, 77, 27-38, doi:10.1017/s1464793101005796. 
Enquist, M.; Arak, A. Symmetry, beauty and evolution. Nature 1994, 372, 169-172, 
doi:10.1038/372169a0. 
Zaidel, D.W.; Aarde, S.M.; Baig, K. Appearance of symmetry, beauty, and health in 
human faces. Brain Cogn 2005, 57, 261-263, doi:10.1016/j.bandc.2004.08.056. 
Zaidel, D.W.; Cohen, J.A. The face, beauty, and symmetry: perceiving asymmetry in 
beautiful faces. Int J Neurosci 2005, 115, 1165-1173, 
doi:10.1080/00207450590914464. 

100.  Frank, S.A. Evolutionary design of regulatory control. I. A robust control theory 

analysis of tradeoffs. J Theor Biol 2019, 463, 121-137, 
doi:10.1016/j.jtbi.2018.12.023. 

101.  Frank, S.A. Evolutionary design of regulatory control. II. Robust error-correcting 

feedback increases genetic and phenotypic variability. J Theor Biol 2019, 468, 72-81, 
doi:10.1016/j.jtbi.2019.02.012. 

102.  Frank, S.A. Evolution of robustness and cellular stochasticity of gene expression. 

PLoS Biol 2013, 11, e1001578, doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1001578. 

103.  Frank, S.A. Natural selection. III. Selection versus transmission and the levels of 
selection. J Evol Biol 2012, 25, 227-243, doi:10.1111/j.1420-9101.2011.02431.x. 
104.  Frank, S.A. Maladaptation and the paradox of robustness in evolution. PLoS One 

2007, 2, e1021, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0001021. 

105.  Levin, M.; Pietak, A.M.; Bischof, J. Planarian regeneration as a model of anatomical 

homeostasis: Recent progress in biophysical and computational approaches. Semin 
Cell Dev Biol 2018, 87, 125-144, doi:10.1016/j.semcdb.2018.04.003. 

106.  Fields, C.; Levin, M. Are Planaria Individuals? What Regenerative Biology is Telling 

Us About the Nature of Multicellularity. Evolutionary Biology 2018, 45, 237-247, 
doi:10.1007/s11692-018-9448-9. 

107.  Bessho, Y.; Tamura, S.; Hori, H.; Tanaka, H.; Ohama, T.; Osawa, S. Planarian 

mitochondria sequence heterogeneity: relationships between the type of cytochrome c 
oxidase subunit I gene sequence, karyotype and genital organ. Mol. Ecol. 1997, 6, 
129-136, doi:10.1046/j.1365-294x.1997.00162.x. 

108.  Tamura, S.; Oki, I.; Kawakatsu, M. A Review of Chromosomal Variation in Dugesia-
Japonica and D-Ryukyuensis in the Far-East. Hydrobiologia 1995, 305, 79-84, 
doi:Doi 10.1007/Bf00036366. 

109.  Oviedo, N.J.; Morokuma, J.; Walentek, P.; Kema, I.P.; Gu, M.B.; Ahn, J.M.; Hwang, 

J.S.; Gojobori, T.; Levin, M. Long-range neural and gap junction protein-mediated 
cues control polarity during planarian regeneration. Dev Biol 2010, 339, 188-199, 
doi:S0012-1606(09)01402-X [pii] 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.12.012. 

110.  Nogi, T.; Levin, M. Characterization of innexin gene expression and functional roles 
of gap-junctional communication in planarian regeneration. Dev Biol 2005, 287, 314-
335, doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2005.09.002. 

111.  Durant, F.; Morokuma, J.; Fields, C.; Williams, K.; Adams, D.S.; Levin, M. Long-

Term, Stochastic Editing of Regenerative Anatomy via Targeting Endogenous 
Bioelectric Gradients. Biophysical Journal 2017, 112, 2231-2243, 
doi:10.1016/j.bpj.2017.04.011. 

112.  Levin, M. Bioelectric signaling: Reprogrammable circuits underlying embryogenesis, 
regeneration, and cancer. Cell 2021, 184, 1971-1989, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2021.02.034. 

113.  Harris, M.P. Bioelectric signaling as a unique regulator of development and 

regeneration. Development 2021, 148, doi:10.1242/dev.180794. 

28 

 
114.  Levin, M.; Pezzulo, G.; Finkelstein, J.M. Endogenous Bioelectric Signaling 

Networks: Exploiting Voltage Gradients for Control of Growth and Form. Annu Rev 
Biomed Eng 2017, 19, 353-387, doi:10.1146/annurev-bioeng-071114-040647. 

115.  Sullivan, K.G.; Emmons-Bell, M.; Levin, M. Physiological inputs regulate species-

specific anatomy during embryogenesis and regeneration. Commun Integr Biol 2016, 
9, e1192733, doi:10.1080/19420889.2016.1192733. 

116.  Emmons-Bell, M.; Durant, F.; Hammelman, J.; Bessonov, N.; Volpert, V.; 

Morokuma, J.; Pinet, K.; Adams, D.S.; Pietak, A.; Lobo, D.; et al. Gap Junctional 
Blockade Stochastically Induces Different Species-Specific Head Anatomies in 
Genetically Wild-Type Girardia dorotocephala Flatworms. Int J Mol Sci 2015, 16, 
27865-27896, doi:10.3390/ijms161126065. 

117.  Lyon, P. Of what is “minimal cognition” the half-baked version? Adapt Behav 2020, 

28, 407-424, doi:10.1177/1059712319871360. 

118.  Baluska, F.; Miller, W.B.; Reber, A.S. Cellular and evolutionary perspectives on 

organismal cognition: from unicellular to multicellular organisms. Biological Journal 
of the Linnean Society 2022, doi:10.1093/biolinnean/blac005. 

119.  Reber, A.S.; Baluska, F. Cognition in some surprising places. Biochem Biophys Res 

Commun 2021, 564, 150-157, doi:10.1016/j.bbrc.2020.08.115. 

120.  Baluska, F.; Reber, A.S. Cellular and organismal agency - Not based on genes: A 

comment on Baverstock. Prog Biophys Mol Biol 2021, 167, 161-162, 
doi:10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2021.11.001. 

121.  Levin, M. Technological Approach to Mind Everywhere: An Experimentally-

Grounded Framework for Understanding Diverse Bodies and Minds. Front Syst 
Neurosci 2022, 16, 768201, doi:10.3389/fnsys.2022.768201. 

122.  O'Donnell, S.; Bulova, S.J.; DeLeon, S.; Khodak, P.; Miller, S.; Sulger, E. Distributed 

cognition and social brains: reductions in mushroom body investment accompanied 
the origins of sociality in wasps (Hymenoptera: Vespidae). Proc Biol Sci 2015, 282, 
doi:10.1098/rspb.2015.0791. 

123.  Thompson, B.; Kirby, S.; Smith, K. Culture shapes the evolution of cognition. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A 2016, 113, 4530-4535, doi:10.1073/pnas.1523631113. 

124.  Smith, J.M. The Importance of the Nervous System in the Evolution of Animal Flight. 

Evolution 1952, 6, 127-129, doi:10.2307/2405510. 

125.  Keijzer, F.A. Evolutionary convergence and biologically embodied cognition. 

Interface Focus 2017, 7, 20160123, doi:10.1098/rsfs.2016.0123. 

126.  Keijzer, F.; Arnellos, A. The animal sensorimotor organization: a challenge for the 

environmental complexity thesis. Biol Philos 2017, 32, 421-441, doi:10.1007/s10539-
017-9565-3. 

128. 

127.  Keijzer, F. Moving and sensing without input and output: early nervous systems and 
the origins of the animal sensorimotor organization. Biol Philos 2015, 30, 311-331, 
doi:10.1007/s10539-015-9483-1. 
Jekely, G.; Keijzer, F.; Godfrey-Smith, P. An option space for early neural evolution. 
Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2015, 370, doi:10.1098/rstb.2015.0181. 
de Wiljes, O.O.; van Elburg, R.A.; Biehl, M.; Keijzer, F.A. Modeling spontaneous 
activity across an excitable epithelium: Support for a coordination scenario of early 
neural evolution. Front Comput Neurosci 2015, 9, 110, 
doi:10.3389/fncom.2015.00110. 

129. 

130.  Bongard, J.; Zykov, V.; Lipson, H. Resilient machines through continuous self-
modeling. Science 2006, 314, 1118-1121, doi:10.1126/science.1133687. 
131.  Pfeifer, R.; Iida, F.; Bongard, J. New robotics: design principles for intelligent 

systems. Artificial life 2005, 11, 99-120, doi:10.1162/1064546053279017. 

29 

 
132.  Sole, R.; Amor, D.R.; Duran-Nebreda, S.; Conde-Pueyo, N.; Carbonell-Ballestero, 

M.; Montanez, R. Synthetic collective intelligence. Biosystems 2016, 148, 47-61, 
doi:10.1016/j.biosystems.2016.01.002. 

133.  Pezzulo, G.; Levin, M. Re-membering the body: applications of computational 

neuroscience to the top-down control of regeneration of limbs and other complex 
organs. Integr Biol (Camb) 2015, 7, 1487-1517, doi:10.1039/c5ib00221d. 

30 

 
 
