DUG Insight: A software package for big-data analysis and visualisation, and its
demonstration for passive radar space situational awareness using radio telescopes

Grigg, D.a,b, Tingay, S.J.b, Sokolowski, M.b, Wayth, R.B.b

aDUG Technology, 76 Kings Park Rd, West Perth, 6005, WA, Australia
bInternational Centre for Radio Astronomy Research, Curtin University, Kent St, Bentley, 6102, WA, Australia

2
2
0
2

l
u
J

3
1

]

M

I
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

2
v
8
2
7
4
0
.
7
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

As the demand for software to support the processing and analysis of massive radio astronomy datasets increases
in the era of the SKA, we demonstrate the interactive workﬂow building, data mining, processing, and visualisation
capabilities of DUG Insight. We test the performance and ﬂexibility of DUG Insight by processing almost 68,000 full
sky radio images produced from the Engineering Development Array (EDA2) over the course of a three day period. The
goal of the processing was to passively detect and identify known Resident Space Objects (RSOs: satellites and debris in
orbit) and investigate how radio interferometry could be used to passively monitor aircraft traﬃc. These signals are
observable due to both terrestrial FM radio signals reﬂected back to Earth and out-of-band transmission from RSOs. This
surveillance of the low Earth orbit and airspace environment is useful as a contribution to space situational awareness and
aircraft tracking technology. From the observations, we made 40 detections of 19 unique RSOs within a range of 1,500
km from the EDA2. This is a signiﬁcant improvement on a previously published study of the same dataset and showcases
the ﬂexible features of DUG Insight that allow the processing of complex datasets at scale. Future enhancements of our
DUG Insight workﬂow will aim to realise real-time acquisition, detect unknown RSOs, and continue to process data from
SKA-relevant facilities.

Keywords:
Space situational awareness, DUG Insight, radio astronomy, interactive workﬂow creation, high performance computing

1. INTRODUCTION

Radio astronomy has consistently been at the forefront
of the data challenge in science. Using interferometry, large
arrays of antennas can be formed and the data streams from
all antennas can be combined, processed and time averaged,
reducing output data volumes (Thompson et al., 1991).
Aggregate data rates have evolved from MB/s to GB/s in
the current generation of interferometric radio telescopes.
Examples include the Murchison Wideﬁeld Array (MWA)
in Western Australia (Tingay et al., 2013; Wayth et al.,
2018) and the LOw Frequency ARray (LOFAR) mostly
in the Netherlands (van Haarlem et al., 2013). These
radio interferometers are precursors and pathﬁnders for the
SKA - planned to be the largest radio interferometer ever
constructed - for which the output data rates will reach
TB/s (Chrysostomou et al., 2020).

To meet this future data challenge, signiﬁcant eﬀort is
being placed into the data processing software and compu-
tational platforms for the SKA. For example, an imaging
pipeline that processed full-scale simulated SKA data on
the Summit supercomputer generated 2.6 PB of output
data (Wang et al., 2020). Beyond the core data processing,
these massive output datasets require further processing in

order for SKA users to extract astrophysical information
from them. This will be achieved via a global network of
SKA Regional Centres (SRCs) (Chrysostomou et al., 2020).
SKA users will require eﬃcient methods to manipu-
late datasets on the petabyte to potentially exabyte scale.
In order to undertake quality control, assess the complex
choices made in imaging and calibration processing, and to
extract astrophysical information, work is being undertaken
globally to develop software for these tasks. For example,
CARTA (Cube Analysis and Rendering Tool for Astron-
omy) is an analysis tool designed for image visualisation
and analysis at the scale of SKA precursor telescopes, with
the aim of being scalable for future telescopes (Comrie
et al., 2021). Large-scale data transfer between MeerKAT,
an SKA precursor in South Africa (Booth and Jonas, 2012)
and the UK, has been explored to utilise processing ca-
pacity at the IRIS (Incorporated Research Institutions for
Seismology) computing facilities (Thavasimani and Scaife,
2021).

In this paper we describe the DUG Insight software
package1 (henceforth referred to as Insight). Insight was
developed to support the analysis of seismic data for oil and
gas exploration, where the data exist in multi-dimensional
volumes. Insight is designed to handle massive datasets,

Email address: dylang@dug.com (Grigg, D.)

1https://dug.com/dug-insight/

Preprint submitted to Astronomy and Computing

July 14, 2022

 
 
 
 
 
 
chosen to lie within the FM broadcast band and tuned
to the frequency of an FM transmitter >300 km away.
Characterising the eﬀect of transmitters in this frequency
range for radio telescopes at the site of the low frequency
SKA was a goal of this research.

The dataset used here has been previously analysed for
these purposes using a Python-based bespoke analysis code,
which revealed a range of interesting signals (Tingay et al.,
2020). In addition to astrophysical radio emission across
the sky, the analysis found signals received directly from
FM transmitters, as well as the same FM signals reﬂected
oﬀ aircraft, meteor ionisation trails, and objects in Earth
orbit known as Resident Space Objects (RSOs) - satellites
and space junk.

This last category of signal is interesting, as the increas-
ing population of RSOs is beginning to impact Earth-based
astronomy (Gallozzi et al., 2020), to the point where papers
such as Lawrence et al. (2022) are drafted in an eﬀort to
deter courts from allowing the mass launches of satellites.
The International Astronomical Union says it is “Deeply
concerned about the increasing number of launched and
planned satellite constellations in mainly low Earth orbits”
and have formed the Centre for the Protection of the Dark
and Quiet Sky from Satellite Constellation Interference2
to address this issue.

While the human-made signals are regarded as noise
(Radio Frequency Interference: RFI) in most areas of as-
tronomy, this information is useful for Space Situational
Awareness (SSA). The detection and tracking of RSOs can
be used to assist in managing the space environment. In
this context, the array used here is an example of a pas-
sive bi-static radar system, opportunistically utilising FM
transmitters (Prabu et al., 2020).

As an interesting signal class with astronomical and
space science signiﬁcance, we focus our Insight demon-
stration on improving the detection and characterisation
of FM transmissions reﬂected oﬀ RSOs, relative to the
previously presented rudimentary initial analysis of these
signals (Tingay et al., 2020). A goal of this research is to
use publicly available information for known RSOs to guide
our detection algorithms. We also aim to more comprehen-
sively survey the airspace for aircraft to determine how they
aﬀected the dataset and our results. The search for these
complex signals provides a comprehensive demonstration
of Insight’s capabilities.

We also aim to complement the work of Sokolowski
et al. (2021) which uses the EDA2 and the Aperture Array
Veriﬁcation System 2 (AAVS2; (van Es et al., 2020)), a
similar 256 antenna radio interferometer, to characterise
astrophysical radio transients in the Southern Hemisphere.
In Section 2, we present an overview of the Insight
package. In Section 3, we describe the observational data
and our data processing using Insight. In Section 4 we

2https://www.iau.org/science/scientific_bodies/centres/

CPS/

2

Figure 1: The Engineering Development Array 2, the instrument
used for this work.

with the ability to utilise large-scale back-end compute and
storage. Workﬂows for data manipulation and processing
can utilise built-in standard signal processing methods, as
well as other bespoke processing functions, or scripts sup-
plied by the user. The results of workﬂows can be visualised
in real-time, allowing highly interactive processing for the
user. Insight is described in more detail in Section 2.

We demonstrate the application of Insight to radio
astronomy data. The data structures, data volumes, and
signal processing algorithms common in radio astronomy
are similar to those encountered in seismic data processing.
While the dataset we have chosen for this demonstration
is not of large volume, it is complex and contains signals
from astrophysical and anthropogenic radio sources. The
data are from an interferometric array that is being used to
benchmark the performance of SKA antenna technologies,
the so-called Engineering Development Array 2 (EDA2;
Figure 1) (Wayth et al., 2021). The array consists of
256 individual low frequency antennas arranged on a 35
m diameter footprint, representing the architecture of a
single SKA ‘station’. The Western Australian based low
frequency SKA will consist of 512 similar stations spread
over thousands of square kilometres.

The images produced by the EDA2 cover the entire sky
and have been generated at high cadence over an extended
observational period (every ∼8 s over 75 hours). The radio
frequency used for the observations has been purposefully

present our results, Section 5 details the discussion, and
conclusions follow in Section 6.

2. Insight

Insight is an interactive software package for seismic
data quality control, qualitative/quantitative interpreta-
tion, visualisation, workﬂow development, and multidi-
mensional big data-analysis. With custom technology for
diﬀerent types of input data, Insight allows advanced
signal processing and imaging workﬂows to minimise the
risk associated with hydrocarbon exploration.

A knowledge of High Performance Computing (HPC)
and scripting is not necessary in the regular usage of
Insight, allowing the user to be more research and re-
sults focused. The back-end algorithms connecting the
software to the HPC interface allow the use of a wide range
of modern architectures best suited to the job. Stream-
lined tools allow the rapid iteration of investigation and
data manipulation with interactive visualisation. Lengthy
command-line compilation stages or the need to orches-
trate disparate tools and scripts is avoided. Custom stan-
dalone, non-interactive processes can also be run through
the Insight framework to have the job submission and
output handling managed by the software and in a GUI.
Fundamental, highly optimised geophysical algorithm’s
full waveform inversion (van Leeuwen and Herrmann, 2013)
and reverse time migration (Zhou et al., 2018) have been
run on 170,000 cores for ∼447,000 node hours and ∼421,000
simultaneous cores, respectively. This demonstrates both
the scalability of Insight and the stability of the HPC
system the software is coupled with.

To demonstrate the applicability of Insight to other
domains such as radio astronomy, the following general
example highlights how a typical Insight project functions.
Insight features a comprehensive, customisable data-
loading tool to deal with a diverse range of formats which
may not be standardised. If necessary, the raw data are
ingested through this tool into Insight’s optimised data
format. This stores adjacent data in a bundle which it refers
to as a ‘brick’, selected based on the data type to maximise
throughput and minimise unnecessary I/O. This allows
eﬃcient interactive processing and visualisation without
sacriﬁcing speed in production runs or ease of use at scale.
Quality control (QC) of the dataset generally follows
and Insight hosts an array of tools to interrogate the
raw data for anomalies. QC of multi-terabyte datasets
needs to be performed quickly but comprehensively and
the QC tools give the user the ability to perform global
QC that identiﬁes anomalies that can be analysed in ﬁne
detail. Examples are acquisition related errors, such as a
faulty sensor, or oversights by the technical team, such as
poor calibration, or unavoidable events, such as lightning,
which can either render sections of the data unusable or
necessitate additional ﬁltering. One example of these tools
is the RMS map, which is designed to give a broad overview
of the quality of the dataset.

Dynamic processing workﬂows are then created to ma-
nipulate data according to user deﬁned rubrics. Through
this system, the user can interactively test their data pro-
cessing choices. The workﬂow is structured so that each
processing step represents a ﬁlter or operation with an
interactive output that can be visualised to help achieve
optimal parameterisation. The user can arbitrarily ﬁlter
or rearrange the dimensionality of their datasets for both
visualisation and processing. For example, this could be
utilised to view a section of every image in the dataset
simultaneously to identify local anomalies. This expedites
the time to achieve optimal parameterisation and prevents
the user from spending time submitting/waiting for a job
to ﬁnish, which is inherent to a HPC dependent workﬂow
system.

The user can generate or manually apply a variety of an-
notation tools to highlight locations or events in the dataset.
These annotations can then be integrated as parameters in
the processing workﬂow. A variety of visualisations such
as histograms, graphs, and two/three dimensional repre-
sentations of the data can become increasingly relevant
as processing progresses. The visualisation of attributes
across the data (typically in ﬁve or more dimensions) allows
validation of the processing quality.

For advanced users who wish to customise their own pro-
cesses and ﬁlters, Insight features an interactive Python
Integrated Development Environment (IDE) to cater for
custom algorithms. The IDE allows the user to interac-
tively test their script live within the processing workﬂow,
with changes in the script being reﬂected in the visualisa-
tions of the output. This allows for rapid debugging and
optimisation of Python code through interactive execution
on intermediate process outputs. For users who wish to
use other more performant languages, there is functional-
ity to plug straight in to Insight’s own architecture (Java
based) which allows for connection to native and external
applications through the JNI (Java Native Interface) for
executing C or C++ code.

Figures 2 and 3 show screenshots of the Graphical
User Interface of the Insight software. Figure 2 shows
the typical working setup of the software. On the left is
the control panel where the user performs the processing,
selects items to view, submits jobs to the HPC cluster, and
controls the software. An example workﬂow is pictured
with a custom code process that produces the circular
white cutout on the bottom right hand side of the image.
The interactive output of ‘Process 7’ from the workﬂow is
being visualised in the image viewer on the right. A 3D
spherical projection of a generalised orthographic world
coordinate system has been superimposed over the image
from coordinate information provided by the dataset’s
metadata. This allows exploration of the dataset from
varying angles in multiple dimensions.

The 3D viewer can be seen in Figure 3. Here a 2D
dataset is being viewed as a pseudo-3D volume where each
image occupies one plane of voxels. Increasing the image
In this
index is equivalent to moving forward in time.

3

Figure 2: A typical view of the Insight Graphical User Interface.

example, the lower negative amplitudes have been made
transparent and this accentuates internal features of the
volume. There is a pattern of detected signals over the red
predicted trajectory.

The dataset can be sliced in various dimensions (such
as viewing an image, viewing one column of pixels across
multiple images, or viewing one row of pixels across mul-
tiple images) and viewed simultaneously across multiple
interconnected visualisation windows at any granularity.
This interconnection enables the user to ﬂexibly interro-
gate their data and highlight trends or areas of interest for
further processing. For this example, the input dataset to
the workﬂow forms the only data on disk. The 12 steps
of processing being visualised in the 3D viewer have been
interactively computed. This way there is no waiting for
jobs to ﬁnish and no unnecessary intermediate products
are stored to disk as they are instead stored in memory for
immediate analysis.

The software interfaces to the HPC system through an
adapter to the cluster’s queueing system. The beneﬁt of
running jobs through the Insight GUI are that outputs
and workﬂow metadata are stored in a predictable location
aiding in the reproducibility of results. It also provides
a tool to give the user ﬁne control of products on-disk
through the GUI which is useful for large projects.

Insight is also available on an expanding list of cloud

providers.

The general framework set out by Insight provides an
eﬃcient transition into other large-scale signal processing
domains. The size of a production seismic dataset (or
volume as it is known in Insight) is usually on the order of
terabytes to petabytes. Such dataset sizes are now common

in modern radio astronomy and a niche that Insight can
ﬁll is the on-the-ﬂy interaction with these datasets in the
transition to exascale processing. Insight’s QC tools have
been identiﬁed as a potential point of interest to explore,
for ﬂagging poor quality data and removing artefacts. The
visual interaction with data has been highly beneﬁcial
in seismic data processing, even at the petabyte scale.
To exercise this point, the study described here aims to
visualise, run QC analysis, and process a radio astronomy
dataset. This is outlined in Section 3.

While the reader may have questions regarding whether
Insight can be used as a comprehensive tool for their radio
astronomy project, it is important to note that the software
is constantly evolving. The trajectory of this development
is to ensure that a user can complete their work eﬃciently
and with scientiﬁc rigour so that results can be reported and
reproduced for future interrogation. Part of this growth of
the software comes from discerning users’ needs to guide the
development. Further discussion on this is always invited.

3. OBSERVATIONS AND DATA PROCESSING

The dataset used for this work was acquired using
the Engineering Development Array 2 (EDA2) over three
days spanning 31st January - 3rd February 2020. The
observations and data processing are described in detail by
Tingay et al. (2020).

Brieﬂy, the EDA2 is composed of 256 dual-polarisation
MWA dipole antennas in a 35 m diameter footprint. Used
as an imaging interferometer, the calibrated and processed
EDA2 data produced 33,944 images in each of the two
polarisations (XX=East-West dipole; YY=North-South
dipole) over the course of the three day period. Each image

4

Figure 3: The Insight 3D viewer. Pictured are the diﬀerence images of the EDA2 dataset described in this paper as a semi-transparent
pseudo-3D volume. The image with index 31,546 is rendered in full on the right hand side, as well as the bottom row of pixels for each image
along the base of the cyan prism. The gaps are due to noisy images being removed prior to this processing step. All data displayed have
passed through 12 steps of processing which has been computed interactively in this visualisation. The red curves are annotations derived from
external data on the predicted trajectory of the International Space Station (NORAD ID: 25,544).

used 7.92 s of data produced in a 0.926 MHz bandwidth
with a central frequency of 98.4375 MHz. The images cover
the entire visible sky, horizon to horizon, from the EDA2
location (26.703056 S, 116.672268 E). Example images are
displayed in the left column in Figure 5.

The input data to the Insight processing were 33,994
XX and 33,994 YY FITS images which had been prepared
with MIRIAD (Sault et al., 1995). This processing was also
outlined in the previous work (Tingay et al., 2020). The
customisable nature of the Insight data-loading tool allowed
ingestion of the two polarisations separately into Insight’s
optimised data format.

The ﬂowchart pictured in Figure 4 shows a visual rep-
resentation of the processing workﬂow explained in the
remainder of this section.

3.1. Data Integrity and Quality Control Checks

Insight’s toolkit features an array of data integrity
and QC tools which were used to identify both acquisition
based anomalies (e.g. one of the EDA2 dipole sensors is
faulty) or data dependent anomalies (e.g. RFI).

tially in time and assigned to a voxel as can be seen in
Figure 3. This included the ability to slice through the
volume spatially and temporally in a cross-image sense
to highlight unusable images. Images containing a high
level of noise were immediately visually identiﬁable and
could be scrutinised in more detail if needed. This gave
an immediate understanding for the amount of RFI con-
tamination in the dataset. The ﬁnal 94 images from each
polarisation were removed, as this QC highlighted that
they contained pixel values that were consistently very low.
Further investigation based on this analysis revealed that
hardware failure rendered the images unusable.

To ensure no images were missing, the hour, minute,
and second from the UTC of each image were plotted and
analysed for anomalies. There were no breaks in the regular
7.92 s acquisition of each image. The coordinate systems
described in the image metadata were separately plotted
for each image, to ensure there were no coordinate system
errors in the dataset.

3.2. Data Preparation

A pseudo 3D volume was visualised to identify any
dataset level anomalies. The images were ordered sequen-

The following processing was performed and parame-
terised interactively in Insight through the data trans-

5

Images which contained a source of high amplitude RFI
would often be unusable due to sidelobe contamination
across the image. Within a custom script, the RMS of each
image was calculated as a process in the workﬂow. A cross-
image display was used to view one column of pixels from
each image with the RMS plotted above. This made inter-
rogating a speciﬁc image with a high RMS straightforward
and allowed an intuition to be built by testing diﬀerent
thresholds and deciding if images were correctly being re-
moved. As a result of this testing, an RMS upper limit of
200 Jy/beam was found to optimally remove noisy images
and retain usable images. 2,626 images were removed based
on this criterion which is approximately 5.8 hours worth
of observation time. The majority were removed due to
very strong reﬂected signals from aircraft. Some speciﬁc
instances of noisy images could also be removed manually
when found in an interactive interrogation of the dataset.

3.3. Rotation, Shifting and Stacking

To detect reﬂected terrestrial FM transmissions from
RSOs close to or below the per-image noise level, images
were stacked along the path of the RSO to increase its
SNR.

In diﬀerence space, the RSOs have a distinctive signa-
ture of two diﬀuse components: a positive feature followed
by a negative feature (Prabu et al., 2020) (henceforth re-
ferred to as the ‘diﬀerence signature’). The diﬀerence
signature can be seen inside the red squares on the right
hand column in Figure 5. It is a function of the beam
response of the array and the motion of the RSO over
the duration of the two observations (∼ 16 seconds). The
positive leading feature is the location of the RSO in frame
In+1 and the negative feature is the location of the RSO
in the previous frame, In. Along the RSO’s trajectory,
the diﬀerence signature will rotate as the RSO’s position
changes with respect to the array. To ensure the SNR is
optimally increased when stacking, each image must be
rotated and shifted to correct for this rotation and the
movement of the RSO before stacking.

To calculate the rotation and stacking parameters, in-
formation is needed on the predicted orbital parameters
of the RSOs. This information is recorded as a Two Line
Element set (TLE) and is publicly available through the
Space Surveillance Network3. The TLE describes the or-
bital parameters of the RSO at an epoch from which the
position of the object can be propagated for a particular
time and observation location. Using the Skyﬁeld Python
module (Rhodes, 2019) and the coordinate information
contained in the FITS metadata, the predicted image pixel
coordinates of the RSOs were calculated for each image.

The position of each RSO within each image was calcu-
lated and this was made available to visualise in Insight
as an annotation, such as the red curves in Figure 3. These
annotations were used to conﬁrm the identity of RSOs

3From space-track.org

6

Figure 4: A visual representation of the major processing steps.

formation pipeline. The two polarisations were stacked
to both increase the Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR) and to
reduce the bias of the polarisation beam pattern which
is shown in Figure 6. A simple average of the two po-
larisations produced the best result in terms of robustly
increasing the SNR of detections and is deﬁned as:

XXn + Y Yn
2
where In is the averaged image at time n, XXn is the

In =

(1)

XX polarisation image at time n, and likewise for Y Yn.

Images at consecutive timesteps were then diﬀerenced
(∆In = In+1 − In). This substantially reduced pseudo-
stationary (in time and/or position) sources of radio emis-
sion such as extragalactic point-like sources and the diﬀuse
radio emission from the Milky Way. The central column in
Figure 5 shows an example of these diﬀerence images.

RFI signals from locations near Geraldton and directly
south of the array (likely Perth, ∼800 km away) are highly
visible in the data. A mute, which is the circular cutout
parameterised in Figure 2, was applied over each of the
towns so that this known source of RFI would not aﬀect
subsequent processing. This was parameterised and tested
interactively in the Insight maths tool which allows the
user to write a logical expression to manipulate the array
values of the images. The formula section on the control
panel in Figure 2 shows how this was written and included
as a process in the workﬂow.

Figure 5: Three timesteps of combined XX and YY polarisation images (left column), corresponding diﬀerence images (middle column), and
cumulative stacks of the International Space Station (ISS; NORAD 25,544) after shifting and stacking (right column). In order from top to
bottom for the cumulative stacks, they have fold numbers of 1, 17, and 33 which represents the number of diﬀerence images stacked together
one-by-one over the course of the ISS pass. In the third timestep, the RMS noise in the image is higher due to a bright RFI burst from
Geraldton in the bottom right corner which contaminates the image with noise. In the left and central columns, the predicted location of the
ISS from the TLE information is annotated with a red dot with an arrow to guide the reader’s eye. The red square in the right column images
is to guide the reader’s eye to the centred ISS position in the stacked images.

7

Figure 6: The simulated beam power patterns of a single EDA2 dipole antenna for an inﬁnite ground plane (X polarisation is left and Y
polarisation is right). These have been normalised. The projection is included to show where the pattern ends at the horizon.

(xt, yt), and (xt, yt + 1) must be calculated, referred to
as points A, B, and C, respectively and can be seen in
Figure 7. The vector (cid:42)BA represents the 2D distance and
direction of travel of the RSO with respect to time t and (cid:42)BC
represents the desired orientation of the RSO trajectory
after rotation. This was chosen to orient the positive
feature in the diﬀerence signature in the +y direction and
the negative feature in the −y direction. To solve for the
angle ∠ABC (the angle needed to rotate the RSO) the
following equation was used:

∠ABC = cos−1

(cid:32) (cid:42)BA · (cid:42)BC
|(cid:42)BA||(cid:42)BC|

(cid:33)

.

(2)

Figure 7: A schematic to add visual clarity to the stacking procedure.
The diagram is of an arbitrary image and the horizon is pictured for
reference. The vectors are not to typical scale.

found in the dataset or to show the predicted position of
an RSO when manually scrolling through images.

This study considered all RSOs within a perigee range
of 400 - 1,500 km, also known as low Earth orbit. 6,110
RSOs matched this criterion between the dates 2020-01-31
to 2020-02-03.

For a particular frame at time t, an RSO’s predicted
pixel location is propagated from the TLE and found to
be (xt, yt). This point is translated to an origin which was
arbitrarily chosen to be (64, 64) or point O - the centre of
the 128×128 pixel image. Any oﬀset in the RSO’s observed
position from point O will be mainly due to inaccuracies in
the TLE (generally due to the TLE being out of date). In
this study the oﬀsets were generally found to be less than
one pixel.

To rotate the diﬀerence signature correctly, (xt+1, yt+1),

To correct ∠ABC for the true clockwise angle, if xt+1 <

xt then ∠ABC needs to be subtracted from 360°.

∠ABC is then calculated per image when an RSO is
above the horizon and is applied with respect to the origin,
for each RSO. Each time the RSO crosses the visible ﬁeld
of view, the images across the path are stacked together.
For N diﬀerence images in the pass, the stacked diﬀerence
image (∆Is) is:

∆Is =

N
(cid:88)

n=1

∆In

(3)

There was no need to compensate for N in this stack
as the SNR and morphology classiﬁcations were performed
on a per-stack basis meaning that normalisation had no
eﬀect on the results.

Through interactive testing of the Insight workﬂow, it
was found that an RSO would generally only be detectable
for the central third of the pass for the higher amplitude
detections. This is where the RSO passes closest to the

8

zenith and when the physical distance between the RSO
and the EDA2 is at a minimum for that pass.
Images
outside this middle third only introduced noise into the
stacking and were therefore not included in the stack.

As can be seen in the branch on the ﬂowchart in Figure
4, the shifts and rotations were calculated once outside of
Insight and this information was input into the workﬂow
as a CSV ﬁle. Any of the 6,110 RSOs could then be
instantly stacked for any pass, which was valuable for
testing the workﬂow on speciﬁc RSOs.

3.4. Quantifying Detections

Reproducibility and eﬃciency of the workﬂow was a
major consideration, ensuring that meaningful results could
be delivered at scale. Diﬀerentiating between detections
and non-detections was crucial, as this workﬂow creates
almost a hundred thousand stacks, most of which contain
only noise. Therefore a critical consideration in the post
processing analyses was how to quantify a detection.

The stacks were reduced to only contain a small sub-
image region centred on the origin (point O). The sub-image
extent was 9 x 14 pixels, totalling 126 pixels. The extents
were chosen to include only data for which all rotated and
shifted images contributed to the stack.

By interactively testing strong detections, it was found
that some stacks with a small number of frames were pro-
duced when the RSO was only visible for a short period of
time. This was often due to the RSO’s trajectory remaining
close to the horizon at a large angle to the zenith. There
were no detections made with N < 24 in interactive or
larger automated tests and therefore stacks which satisﬁed
this condition were excluded. The RSO only being visible
at large zenith angles means the RSO was further away
from the array and therefore less likely to be detected.

To classify potential detections, a Gaussian function
was ﬁtted to each remaining stack to model the diﬀerence
signature. Constraints on the morphology of the ﬁtted
Gaussians could then be imposed to systematically select
detections. Insight’s Python IDE enabled the rapid de-
velopment of this Gaussian ﬁtting, allowing the code to be
altered and tested interactively. This meant that no jobs
had to be submitted to the HPC system and tests were
only calculated locally on the machine as required. This
was a particularly useful feature of Insight that increased
the productivity of this project.

The Scipy curve fit algorithm (Virtanen et al., 2020)
was used to ﬁt the Gaussian function to the diﬀerence
signature, with the function consisting of two equal but
inverted amplitude (A) Gaussians (one with a positive
amplitude and one with a negative amplitude). These
were separated on the y-axis of the stack by a distance
y0 = |y0,pos| + |y0,neg|, where y0,pos and y0,neg are oﬀsets
from y = 0 for the positive Gaussian and the negative
Gaussian, respectively. Both Gaussians are oﬀset from
x = 0 by x0 and share a common value for σ. Expressed

in full,

Imodel = A(e−C((x−x0)2+(y−y0,pos)2)−
e−C((x−x0)2+(y−y0,neg)2)),

(4)

where C = 1

2σ2 .

Thus, the ﬁtted parameters are A, x0, y0,pos, y0,neg,
and σ (via C). Starting values for these parameters were
provided to the curve fit algorithm to initiate the ﬁtting.
These were based on the expected position of the RSO based
on the rotation and shifting correction, the maximum and
minimum values in the small sub-image region, and a sigma
of 1. Providing reasonable starting values assisted in the
convergence of the ﬁt.

The quality of the ﬁtting was tested interactively on
strong detections by subtracting the ﬁt from the stack
to examine the residuals. Good ﬁts result in noise-like
residuals.

The SNR of detections was deﬁned as the ﬁtted value
of A (an estimate of the signal amplitude) divided by the
square root of the covariance of the ﬁtted value of A (an
estimate of the error on the ﬁtted parameter). We adopt a
detection threshold of SNR > 6 and only examine stacks
that meet this criterion.

We also select physically plausible morphologies for the
diﬀerence signature. We only select stacks that have a
ﬁtted value of σ < 2, which corresponds to a full width at
half maximum (FWHM) for the Gaussian of 2σ(cid:112)2ln(2) ∼
2.355σ ∼ 5 pixels. This is chosen because the FWHM of
the EDA2 resolution element is approximately ﬁve pixels
in extent (calculated as ∼ λ/D, where λ is the wavelength
of the radio waves and D is the diameter of the EDA2).
Diﬀerence signatures with ﬁtted sizes greater than ﬁve
pixels cannot be RSOs.

Similarly, the separation between the two Gaussians
cannot be more than a maximum physically plausible dis-
tance, set by the fastest and closest RSOs producing the
maximum possible angular speed and therefore separation
between two images eight seconds apart. We have set the
upper and lower limits for the Gaussian separation to be
2.5 < |y0,pos| + |y0,neg| < 7 pixels which equate to altitudes
of ∼ 400 km and ∼ 1, 100 km respectively. Note we have
included TLEs up to a perigee of 1,500 km as these sep-
arations are an approximation. We expect noise to aﬀect
the appearance of the separation in some instances and the
diﬀuse nature of the diﬀerence signature to decrease the
accuracy of separation measurements.

Interactive analysis showed that the expected position
of an RSO generated from TLE information was generally
never more than one pixel away from the observed position
in the horizontal direction and never more than two pixels in
the vertical direction. This extra variability in the vertical
axis is likely due to contraction of the diﬀerence signature
from diﬀerent observed angular speeds of the RSOs at each
time step.

As a ﬁnal criterion, to prevent poor ﬁts, the absolute
value of the ﬂux density at the maximum (x0, y0,pos) and

9

minimum (x0, y0,neg) of the ﬁtted model could not be more
than twice the input stack values at the same locations.
This criterion discards examples where the algorithm pro-
duces poor ﬁts due to either a highly dominant positive or
negative Gaussian component.

The stacks which met these criteria were deemed candi-
date RSO detections and were subjected to further analysis.
The ﬂexible nature of Insight’s internal format allowed
the output dataset to be ordered so that the individual
diﬀerence images could be placed next to each stack for
quick and eﬃcient further interrogation of each candidate
detection. The ﬁnal analysis was performed on this volume.
Once the parameterisation of the workﬂow was deemed
optimal, it was submitted as a job through the Insight
UI so that the output could be written to disk. Running
this job in Insight has multiple beneﬁts. No Slurm, HPC
cluster management software, or command line interaction
was required. Especially important for large scale projects
is the full logging of parameters and job execution for repro-
ducibility of results, with the output stored in a predictable
directory in the project structure.

√

For N stacked images with a constant signal and Gaus-
sian noise, the noise is ∝ 1/
N . In this workﬂow, there
are two passes of stacking which were described in Equa-
tions 1 and 3 and as discussed, the minimum value of N
allowed was 24. With each image being the stack of two
polarisations, a minimum SNR improvement of
48 can
be expected compared to a single image at a single polari-
sation. This is an approximation, as in reality the noise is
not completely Gaussian in nature and the amplitude of
the source may vary.

√

An additional test was run to determine the probability
of false positives. The processing ﬂow described above
was re-run with the image indices shifted forwards by 10
and was limited to 10,000 RSO ﬂyovers. This meant that
the predicted TLE trajectories did not track RSOs. The
results of this test aided in discerning the likelihood of the
stack containing a false positive detection. It also gave an
indication of the false positive probability for each category
of detection listed in Section 4, as no reﬂected terrestrial
radio energy was expected to stack over consecutive images.
The results of the analysis are also described in the next
section.

4. Results

After processing, 348 stacks were recorded as contain-
ing candidate diﬀerence signatures. Five categories were
formed to describe the phenomena causing these candidate
detections. The categories were formed by interrogating the
pre-stacked diﬀerence images to determine if the diﬀerence
signature was caused by a persistent signal over multiple
images or due to bright signals in a small number of images.
Candidates were categorised based on cadence, rotation
angle, and the change in amplitude between consecutive
images. In some cases, additional information such as the
distance to an RSO and the angular speed were calculated

10

to deﬁnitively categorise a detection. The stacking and clas-
siﬁcation was able to be processed interactively. Excluding
individual frames to see how the detection changed was
useful to determine if there was low amplitude persistent
signal without single image bright signals. The purpose of
categorising the detections was to determine if a candidate
was a conﬁrmed RSO. The following results detail each of
these ﬁve categories:

4.1. Detections due to a single short duration signal

Detections in this category contained a single short
duration signal (a burst) that appeared in only one time
step along the predicted trajectory of the RSO. 65% of the
candidates fell into this category, with 82% in the false
positive test. A simple χ-squared test shows there is no
statistical diﬀerence between these results, suggesting that
the detections in this category are not due to RSOs.

In diﬀerence space, the burst is positive in frame ∆In+1
and negative in the subtracted ∆In frame. The predicted
position of the RSO under test moves between frames,
meaning that ∆In+1 and ∆In are slightly oﬀset when
stacked. This mimics the diﬀerence signature of an RSO
and is why the ability to eﬃciently interrogate the pre-
stacked images is very useful. The likely cause of these
signals is the reﬂection of terrestrial radio emission oﬀ the
ionised plasma in meteor trails (Obenberger et al., 2014;
Zhang et al., 2018) and the inexact diﬀerencing of bright
sources (Tingay et al., 2020). These meteor reﬂections can
then randomly align with the trajectory of an RSO.

The ﬁnal ∼ 1.8 hours of the observation time was con-
taminated by lightning and this manifested as greatly in-
creased noise on the Western horizon. There were three
cases of this lightning causing the stack to be a candidate.

4.2. Detections due to two short duration signals

This category encompasses the presence of two tempo-
rally distinct signals contributing to the diﬀerence signature
in the stacked image, as opposed to a single signal as de-
scribed above. 4.6% of the stacks fell into this category,
with 4.5% in the false positives test. Again, this diﬀer-
ence is not statistically signiﬁcant. Therefore it is unlikely
that these are RSO detections and are most likely to be
chance coincidences of two meteor reﬂections along the
RSO trajectory.

4.3. Detection of aircraft

Aircraft prove to be eﬃcient reﬂectors of radio waves
in the 98.4375 MHz channel as they are much larger than
most RSOs and far closer to the EDA2. While detected
RSOs are in the 400 - 1,500 km range, aircraft can be
< 10 km away from the EDA2. They produced many
of the highest amplitude signals in the dataset. Peak
amplitudes frequently exceeded 100,000 Jy/beam and this
would completely contaminate an image with sidelobes. If
the peak amplitude of an aircraft exceeded 8,000 to 10,000
Jy/beam, the image would likely exceed the maximum

headed to/from small mining towns which are numerous
in northern and central Western Australia.

The Perth International Airport had the vast majority
of International ﬂight traﬃc for Western Australia during
the 2020/21 year4. The largest domestic airport in close
vicinity to the EDA2 is the Geraldton Domestic Airport,
which had 441 inboard and 442 outboard aircraft in the
2020/21 year. This equates to a ﬂux of ∼ 2.4 aircraft per
day for a uniform distribution of ﬂights.

For the North/South ﬂying aircraft not along the hori-
zon, 69 were ﬂying North to South and only 20 from South
to North. We assume these to be international ﬂight routes.
Monthly airport traﬃc data are available for Perth air-
port5, recording 3,572 inbound and 3,581 outbound ﬂights
in February 2020. Assuming an even distribution across
days of the month (which is probably less valid with the
gradual reduction in ﬂights due to the onset of the COVID-
19 pandemic), there were 875 inbound international air-
craft which equates to ∼30 international aircraft arriving in
Perth each day. Assuming all 69 North to South aircraft in
the dataset were international ﬂights, then this equates to
23 per day. When acknowledging that ﬂights are unlikely
to be uniformly distributed across the month, the expected
value is similar to the observed value. The remaining 7
per day could arrive at Perth from western or southern
ﬂight routes such as the Johannesburg to Perth route which
would be out of range of the EDA2’s sensing abilities.

If the utilisation of technologies such as the EDA2
are interesting for the purposes of detecting and tracking
aircraft, the 256 antennas of the EDA2 are unnecessary for
a cost-eﬀective solution. To determine a suitable number of
individual antennas needed for the detection of aircraft, the
SNR of a subset of South ﬂying (likely to Perth Airport)
aircraft at an angle of 43° < θ < 47° to the zenith was
calculated. The average SNR of these 262 detections was
∼3,500. The signal was deﬁned as the RMS of pixels above
a 6σ threshold and within 5 pixels of the centre of the
aircraft. The noise was deﬁned as the RMS of these same
pixels 50 timesteps earlier. Assuming an SNR of 10 is
adequate to sense an aircraft ﬂying at a minimum angle of
45° to the zenith, 8 - 16 EDA2 dipole antennas would be
more than suﬃcient to detect the aircraft. This presents
a cost-eﬀective solution for passive aircraft detection from
both a construction and maintenance perspective.

We can detect aircraft at an altitude of 10,000 m to a
distance of ∼100 km. This covers ∼ 31, 000 km2 of land,
which is approximately the size of Belgium. If three of
these sensors were used in an equilateral triangle formation,
they could be positioned ∼170 km away from each other
for complete overlapping coverage.

4https://www.bitre.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/

webairport_fy_1986-2021.xlsx

5https://www.bitre.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/

webmonthlyairportjune2021.xlsx

Figure 8: Locations of aircraft detected over the EDA2. The blue
grid represents the visible area above the horizon. This image was
taken from Insight’s image viewer.

allowable 200 Jy/beam RMS threshold and be dropped
by the processing ﬂow. Aircraft were normally distinct
from RSOs by their signal amplitude, angular speed, and
size, but there were some cases closer to the horizon where
further analysis was necessary. 10% of candidate detections
were due to aircraft.

Building an intuition of common ﬂight paths, reﬂec-
tivity changes, and the detection frequency of aircraft is
important for other more sensitive astronomical studies
where it is crucial to have high quality data free of RFI
(Trott et al., 2019). Insight’s picking tool and interactive
Python processing were used to investigate this separately
to the main RSO detection workﬂow. The picking tool
enables a user to ‘hand place’ an annotation on a position
in the image and in this case it would ﬁnd the closest max-
imum to the pick, which represented the signal from an
aircraft. To better understand the frequency of ﬂight paths,
each aircraft was manually picked on each image. In this
separate workﬂow which was designed solely for aircraft,
the interactive Python processing used these picks to create
a mask of pixels over 6σ, constrained to a radius of ﬁve
pixels around the pick. Peak amplitudes, zenith angles,
and the SNR of aircraft detections were then calculated
interactively.

Figure 8 shows the aircraft picks. This highlights the
ﬂight paths over the EDA2 during the three day recording
period. 185 aircraft passes were detected in this time. As
discussed in the previous work by Tingay et al. (2020), many
of these closer to the zenith will be aircraft ﬂying to/from
Perth, located South of the MRO. The less frequently
traced ﬂight paths are likely attributed to small aircraft

11

4.4. Detection of RSOs

37 of the stacks (11%) showed evidence of a detection,
with none recorded in the false positives test. An addi-
tional three detections were made manually which were
not ﬂagged by the processing ﬂow, taking the total number
of detections to 40. These 40 detections are from 98,244
total passes of 6,110 RSOs over 75 hours. This marks an
improvement of 34 detections compared to the previous
work (Tingay et al., 2020), as well as a reclassiﬁcation
of FLOCK-3P-71 to BGUSAT. We categorise these into
two types, A and B. Type A refers to when a detection is
evident in the stack, but no obvious signals exist in any of
the individual diﬀerence images at the predicted position of
the RSO. Type B refers to detections where clear evidence
of signal is returned at the predicted position of the RSO
over multiple individual diﬀerence images and the stack.
Details of these detections are described in Table 1.

Five examples of type A detections were identiﬁed in
the dataset. These are of interest because they represent
a detection which would not have been possible by ex-
amination of the individual diﬀerence images alone. The
weak signal returned from these detections is below the
noise ﬂoor in the individual diﬀerence images, but when
the rotations, shifts, and stacking have been applied, the
SNR is increased. The individual diﬀerence images were
manually inspected for any noise which could contribute
to the diﬀerence signature that appeared in the stack.

Three tests were conducted on these ﬁve examples to

conﬁrm they were detections.

In the ﬁrst test, each half of the pass was separated and
stacked to see if the diﬀerence signature was still visible in
both. This was done interactively and individual frames or
noisy sections could be removed to see how this aﬀected
the stack. Although this decreased the SNR, it was a useful
tool to exclude candidates where noise contributing to the
diﬀerence signature shape was not immediately obvious.

The second test was to visually inspect the stacks (and
the corresponding diﬀerence images) of other passes of the
RSO to see if there were missed detections.

The ﬁnal test was to research information on the physi-
cal characteristics of the RSO to determine if it was phys-
ically capable of causing a reﬂection. Valid information
included pictures of the RSO, estimation of Radar Cross
Section (RCS), physical size, any long antennas protruding
from the RSO, identiﬁcation as debris (more likely to be
tumbling) and whether it was still commissioned. This
information is only taken lightly into consideration as the
reﬂective properties of an object are diﬀerent in the radio
band than the visual band. Visual light is on the order
of nanometres (10−9) while the wavelength of the 98.4375
MHz channel of this dataset is equivalent to ∼3 m. In
theory, small RSOs such as cubesats should not be resolved
by FM band radio waves unless they have large solar panels
or an antenna which is capable of reﬂecting the long radio
wavelengths.

The closest approach of each RSO to the EDA2 for each
detection is shown in Table 1. Type A detection SL-16

R/B is at the threshold of the EDA2’s sensitivity at the
closest point of its pass. SL-16 R/B has been previously
detected by the MWA at a range of 863 - 873 km and peak
ﬂux density of 137.9 Jy/Beam (Prabu et al., 2020). The
EDA2 has 1/8th the sensitivity of the MWA, therefore a
similar observation by the EDA2 would have 8 times the
noise with the signal below the noise ﬂoor. Stacking allows
the noise to be reduced, thus realising a type A detection.
A total of 32 type B detections were made in this

analysis and are also described in Table 1.

All three detections of the ISS from the previous work
were less than 600 km from the sensor at the closest ap-
proach of the pass (Tingay et al., 2020). The new algo-
rithms in this work allow the detection of the ISS beyond a
range of 1,400 km. We make all detections of the ISS when
it passes less than 1,100 km from the EDA2 as shown in
Table 2. There is a ﬁnal detection at 1,427 km and notably
two additional passes at 1,381 and 1,406 km that are not
detected. In these two passes, noise obfuscates any faint
signal which may have been returned. The orientation
angle of the ISS may also be less favourable to reﬂect any
signal during these passes and explain why no detection is
made in either of these.

For an RSO equidistant from both the FM radio trans-
mitter and the sensor, the received power from the reﬂection
decreases approximately as a function of ∼ 1
d4 , where d
is the distance between the RSO and the source/sensor.
For example, assuming the distance from the source to the
reﬂector is equal to the distance from the receiver to the
reﬂector and that the reﬂection surface of the ISS is con-
stant, the diﬀerence in returned power between the furthest
detection of the ISS (1,427 km) and the next closest pass
(1,746 km) is a factor of ∼ 2.2.

The three weak detections of the Hubble Space Tele-
scope (HST) are all less than 600 km away at the closest
approach of the pass. This demonstrates how decreasing
the physical size of the RSO severely diminishes its ability
to reﬂect signal. The RCS of the ISS is 402 m2 and the
HST 29 m2 6. We could begin to characterise the reﬂective
properties of individual RSOs in the 98.4375 MHz band
with a larger sample size of detections. The ISS also has
elongated, rectangular solar panels which are likely why it
reﬂects the FM band radio signal so eﬃciently.

Of interest are detections of BGUSAT out to 1,459 km
with a SNR of 16.0. In the previous work, it was shown
that BGUSAT is likely transmitting out-of-band (Tingay
et al., 2020). The received power of a directly transmitted
beam instead follows a ∼ 1
d2 law. Depending on the output
power and directionality of the transmitted beam, there
is the potential to detect this at a larger distance than a
typical reﬂector. We are unable to detect the ISS past 1,427
km, yet we are able to detect the cubesat BGUSAT out to
1,459 km with a strong SNR, supporting the argument that
BGUSAT is transmitting out-of-band. MAX VALIER SAT

6www.n2yo.com

12

Table 1: Detected RSOs and their parameters

Count

Satellite name

NORAD ID RCS (m2)

Closest distance of
pass (km)

SNR

The following detections were made on 31st January 2020 (Observed 04:25:41– 23:59:59 UTC)

1
2*
3
4
5*
6

TRITON 1
ARIANE 40+ R/B
BGUSAT
YAOGAN 26
STARLINK 1044
ISS (ZARYA)

39,427
23,561
41,999
40,362
44,749
25,544

0.1 - 1.0
> 1.0
< 0.1
> 1.0
> 1.0
> 1.0

1,007
813
537
513
554
577

26.5
6.4
28.9
11.7
10.2
29.6

The following detections were made on 1st February 2020 (Observed 00:00:00 – 23:59:59 UTC)

7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16*
17†
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26†

BGUSAT
ISS (ZARYA)
BGUSAT
ISS (ZARYA)
KONDOR E
AQUA
AURA
ADEOS 2
TRITON 1
METEOR M1
SAOCOM 1-A
HST
COSMOS 1633
HST
MAX VALIER SAT
BGUSAT
ISS (ZARYA)
RISAT-2BR1
ISS (ZARYA)
TRITON 1

41,999
25,544
41,999
25,544
40,353
27,424
28,376
27,597
39,427
35,865
43,641
20,580
15,592
20,580
42,778
41,999
25,544
44,857
25,544
39,427

< 0.1
> 1.0
< 0.1
> 1.0
> 1.0
> 1.0
> 1.0
> 1.0
0.1 - 1.0
> 1.0
> 1.0
> 1.0
> 1.0
> 1.0
0.1 - 1.0
< 0.1
> 1.0
> 1.0
> 1.0
0.1 - 1.0

1,459
1,045
1,120
942
459
727
725
847
779
834
639
585
484
546
547
650
968
577
1,019
981

16.0
11.1
10.6
33.2
8.0
11.0
12.2
6.5
19.9
8.2
12.9
8.4
6.2
20.8
34.3
33.0
24.2
9.0
11.2
24.0

The following detections were made on 2nd February 2020 (Observed 00:00:00 – 23:59:59 UTC)

27
28
29†
30*
31
32
33
34
35
36

BGUSAT
ISS (ZARYA)
COSMOS 1825
TITAN 4B R/B
HST
MAX VALIER SAT
BGUSAT
ISS (ZARYA)
ISS (ZARYA)
TRITON 1

41,999
25,544
17,566
28,647
20,580
42,778
41,999
25,544
25,544
39,427

< 0.1
> 1.0
> 1.0
> 1.0
> 1.0
0.1 - 1.0
< 0.1
> 1.0
> 1.0
0.1 - 1.0

626
560
537
544
550
864
1,155
1,427
663
635

23.5
30.5
11.0
6.2
21.4
28.6
25.0
10.4
33.8
33.7

The following detections were made on 3rd February 2020 (Observed 00:00:00 – 07:17:43 UTC)

37
38
39
40*

MAX VALIER SAT
ISS (ZARYA)
BGUSAT
SL-16 R/B

42,778
25,544
41,999
16,182

0.1 - 1.0
> 1.0
< 0.1
> 1.0

530
440
556
1,003

25.1
30.5
31.2
7.8

Trajectories were propagated with TLE information from space-track.org. The website
classiﬁes the Radar Cross Section (RCS) into three categories: small (< 0.1 m2), medium (0.1 -
1.0 m2), and large (> 1.0 m2). Detections labelled with * are type A and all others are type B.
Detections labelled with † were only found manually. These will be discussed further in Section
4.4.

13

Table 2: The closest distance between the EDA2 and the ISS for each
pass during the survey.

ISS pass Closest approach (km) Detected
577
1,381
2,319
1,045
942
968
1,019
2,301
1,406
560
1,427
663
2,032
1,746
440
1,882

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
No

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16

and TRITON 1 are both detected out to 864 and 1,007
km, respectively. Instead of their amplitude following the
normal decay curve as an RSO passes over the sky, they
sporadically produce signals at seemingly random intervals
across the path. Seeing as they are also both small cubesats,
we believe that they too are transmitting out of band.

Three detections were made which did not pass the pro-
cessing ﬂow parameterisation (detailed in Section 3.3) and
are marked with a † in Table 1. These were of SAOCOM
1-A, TRITON 1, and COSMOS 1825. The SAOCOM 1-A
and COSMOS 1825 detections were found while interac-
tively interrogating the data for the purposes of the tests
described above. The TRITON 1 detection was found
when conducting a manual analysis of all other passes of
TRITON 1 after it had been detected by the processing
ﬂow. This was standard for any detection made, as a test
of the eﬃcacy of the processing ﬂow.
In all cases, one
of the selection criteria was not met, just falling beyond
the thresholds set for the workﬂow. This illustrates that
noise can warp the diﬀerence signature, meaning the ﬁtted
parameters of the Gaussian in Equation 4 do not accurately
reﬂect the true shape of the signal and as a result the stack
is rejected. Choosing more lenient selection criteria will
lead to more false positives, so the parameterisation is a
balance between conﬁdence of detection and maximising
the number of detections relative to false positives.

Figure 9 shows the relationship between the distance
to an RSO and its peak intensity for type B and manual
detections. The variety of RCSs between RSOs means
there is no general predicted or observed overall trend. The
beam response of dipoles in the EDA2, the orientation of
the reﬂective surface of the RSO, the character of the trans-
mitted radio signal from the source, the distance between
the RSO and the source or receiver, noise, and background

14

sources of RFI can all aﬀect the measured reﬂected signal
from an RSO at any point in time. This is why multiple ob-
servations of an RSO are not expected to ﬁt a perfect power
law. It is of interest to note that detections of BGUSAT
seem to obey a power law, although more observations are
needed to deﬁnitively quantify a relationship between peak
intensity and distance.

The beam power patterns shown in Figure 6 have an
eﬀect on the spatial distribution of detections. Figure 10
shows the diﬀerence between the two polarisations. For
this analysis, the two polarisations were kept separate and
not stacked together, with the diﬀerence imaging being
the only processing done to the data. This was to see the
contribution of each polarisation to each of the detections.
There are more detections in the North/South extremities
for the XX polarisation and more in the East/West ex-
tremities for the YY polarisation. The eﬀect is especially
pronounced for detections of BGUSAT, showing a polarised
signal favouring the YY polarisation. Building detailed
information on the character and behaviour of observed sig-
nal for each RSO is useful information for further research
and to assess the performance of the EDA2 compared to
other interferometric arrays.

The distribution of RSO detections as a function of
time of day in Figure 11 shows no obvious trend between
the two variables. Generally, the RMS noise in an im-
age is lowest 12 hours after the Milky Way is overhead.
This equates to roughly 9 PM local time at the epoch of
observation. There are 19 detections in daylight hours
(6 AM to 7 PM) compared to 21 while the sun is down.
This shows the critical importance of not discarding images
where the sun is close to the zenith. A simple two-tailed
Kolmogorov–Smirnov test shows that the distribution of
detections is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent to a uniform distribution
(p = 0.0122). The 5 hours between 4 AM - 9 AM local
time contain no detections over any of the three days, but
the sample size is not large enough to draw conclusions
from this. The maximum amplitude at the location of Ger-
aldton does not show any daily periodic oscillation which
would imply that the output power of the FM transmitter
decreases over these hours.

4.5. Detection of a diﬀerent RSO

33 stacks incorrectly identiﬁed RSOs to the wrong NO-
RAD ID. There were two causes for this misidentiﬁcation.
The ﬁrst was where the paths of two RSOs intersect and
the same RSO is detected in two stacks under diﬀerent
NORAD IDs. Although the detection looks viable, when
inspecting the diﬀerence images which contribute to the
stack, it is trivial to discard the detection to the incorrect
NORAD ID.

The second is where two RSOs have extremely similar
orbital parameters for the entire pass. SOYUZ MS-13,
SOYUZ MS-15, and PROGRESS MS-13 were all detected
as they were docked to the ISS at the time of this survey.
This meant that their predicted positions were very similar
to that of the ISS and hence were ﬂagged as detections.

Figure 9: The distance between the EDA2 and the RSO for type B and manual detections (N = 35) at the time of peak intensity of the pass.
Both axes are log scale and have been truncated away from 0.

Cygnus NG-12 was also detected as it had unberthed from
the ISS 4 hours prior to detection and the predicted position
was still close enough to the ISS to be detected by the
pipeline. Therefore, these were resolved with knowledge
of the functions of the spacecraft and future incorrect
detections such as these could be mitigated by excluding
corresponding TLEs for the period in which spacecraft are
docked to the ISS.

There were two stacks which were more diﬃcult to
classify, as the two RSOs were not docked to one another.
FLOCK-3P-5 and BGUSAT were launched on the same
payload on 2017-02-15 and have very similar orbits. To
correctly identify which of the RSOs were responsible for
the observed signal, other passes of the two RSOs had to
be interrogated where it became evident that the signal
was due to BGUSAT.

5. Discussion

This study complements and signiﬁcantly extends the
work by Tingay et al. (2020) in temporally and spatially
resolving RFI at the MRO to determine its origin. The
selection of a singular frequency band which overlaps lo-
cal FM radio broadcast allows the passive detection of
backscatter from RSOs, meteors, and aircraft. Character-
ising these signals is important for predicting the eﬀects of
RFI on sensitive radio astronomy experiments and for the
detection and identiﬁcation of RSOs.

Insight’s intuitive approach to building workﬂows was
valuable in the design phase of the workﬂow. The hands-on

Figure 10: The distribution maps of type B and manual RSO
detections (N = 35) for the XX (left) and YY (right) polarisations.
This image was taken from Insight’s image viewer.

15

Figure 11: Detections (N = 40) per binned hour of the day. Hour 0 corresponds to 12 AM midnight local time. The two arrows point to the
nearest hour where the sun and Milky Way centre are directly overhead.

manner of interrogating data from an early stage to identify
anomalies, and the interactive parameter testing resulted
in a highly optimised, scalable workﬂow which can be run
on similar datasets acquired in the future.

A reproducible, production-ready workﬂow was built
and run, detecting 37 individual passes of RSOs with an
additional three manual detections, to in total identify 19
unique RSOs. Only seven passes from three unique RSOs
were detected by Tingay et al. (Tingay et al. misidentiﬁed
BGUSAT as FLOCK-3P-71, which has been resolved in
the current work). For RSOs where backscatter of terres-
trial FM radio is detected, this workﬂow was able to make
detections of the ISS out to a distance of 1,427 km from
the sensor (at the closest distance of the pass). This is an
improvement from 577 km in the previous work (Tingay
et al., 2020) and implies a range of 1,500 km for the detec-
tion of non-transmitting RSOs by the EDA2, as the ISS
was by far the largest in orbit at the time. Two passes
of the ISS were within this range and not detected at a
closest distance of the pass of 1,381 and 1,406 km. Upon
scrutiny, the sidelobes created by both spurious noise and
direct transmission from Geraldton increase the RMS of
the images contributing to the stack and prevent these faint
signals from being detected. This highlights the importance
of RFI being minimised and shows that even though the
Murchison region is classiﬁed as a Radio Quiet Zone (RQZ),
that anthropogenic FM band radio signals still decrease
the quality of this research.

A worrying class of these detections are cubesats trans-
mitting out of band. Multiple high amplitude detections of
BGUSAT with peak amplitudes exceeding 1,000 Jy/Beam
were made. TRITON 1 and MAX VALIER SAT were also
observed to be transmitting out of their allocated bands.
The work by Sokolowski et al. (2021) also found BGUSAT,
TRITON 1, and MAX VALIER SAT to be transmitting
out of range at higher frequencies (and outside the allowed
downlink frequencies for RSOs). Additional studies have

identiﬁed UKube-1 and DUCHIFAT-1 to be exhibiting
similar behaviour Zhang et al. (2018); Prabu et al. (2020).
This growing list of transmitting RSOs further contami-
nates all RQZs. More observations are needed to probe
the character of these transmissions to determine if the
transceivers are faulty, or if there is another reason for
the out-of-band transmission. Studies such as this, Tingay
et al. (2020), Sokolowski et al. (2021), Zhang et al. (2018),
and Prabu et al. (2020) demonstrate that the broadband
nature of these signals is destructive to a range of radio
astronomy research and can hopefully inform future discus-
sions on which electronics are the most reliable for cheap
satellites. With more data over diﬀerent frequency bands
we can determine how these observed signals match up to
ITU regulations which is complex and out of scope for this
paper.

The detection of a single STARLINK satellite does
raise concerns about their visibility in radio astronomy
research. Reasons that we have only detected one, when
117 STARLINK satellites satisﬁed the TLE requirements,
could be because of variation in the transmitter power
pattern, the variable radar cross section of the object, and
the fact that catalogued RCS values are mainly at high
frequency instead of low frequency. It is likely that only
favourable transmitter, object, and receiver geometries will
be detected and it will be worthwhile to test this over
multiple frequency bands in the future. It is also possible
that only STARLINK satellites that have faulty electronics
and are transmitting out of band are detected. Prabu et al.
(2020) encountered a similar scenario in their work.

Rather than characterising the general transient envi-
ronment of the Murchison region, which previous papers
have focused on, this paper looks more speciﬁcally at an-
thropogenic sources of RFI to inform future work on how
these aﬀect radio astronomy research. This research has
shown that a near expected number of international air-
craft are detected in the dataset. Sokolowski et al. (2021)

16

suggests that the parallax eﬀect of two nearby arrays can
be used to generate a 3D ﬂight path of these aircraft,
demonstrating the beneﬁt of using radio interferometry
as an aircraft traﬃc monitoring tool. Sokolowski et al.
(2021) also estimates an expected detection threshold for
BGUSAT based on a radar theory and concludes that the
observed amplitudes of BGUSAT in the dataset are far
more likely caused by “line-of-sight propagation from a
low power transmitter (≤ 1W ) with a small fraction of
out-of-band ‘spill-over’ over a wide frequency band”. Their
analysis of this was in the 159.375 MHz band while this
analysis also supports this conclusion in the 98.4375 MHz
band.

The detections outlined in Table 1 probe the limit of
the range of the EDA2. With the acquisition of more data
by the EDA2, sensitivity limits can be built for each RSO
and additional detections will be useful for determining the
range at which the EDA2 can detect them.

This study makes 40 individual detections of RSOs
compared to the 7 from the previous study (Tingay et al.,
2020), which marks an improvement of almost 6 times.
In Section 3.3, it is shown that the minimum expected
SNR improvement is
48 ≈ 7. It is promising to see that
this work achieves approximately the minimum expected
improvement and future work will aim to push this even
higher.

√

A relevant feature of Insight is its ability to ingest and
provide QC tools for the live acquisition of data. For exam-
ple, Insight is currently used in a production environment
for the QC of data as they are acquired by a seismic vessel.
As each snapshot of the subsurface is acquired, Insight
monitors a directory and passes the raw data through a
series of pre-conﬁgured workﬂows and scripts to visuali-
sations from which a user can perform live QC. Instant
feedback of errors in the acquisition to the crew on the
vessel avoids extended equipment malfunctions which may
aﬀect the quality of data. This workﬂow produces a series
of incremental outputs which are shipped as QC products
with the raw data.

The workﬂow described in this study has the potential
to be run live as data are acquired by an interferometric
array. This would enable catalogue maintenance of RSO
trajectories and for highlighting when aircraft are present
over the array. In anticipation of SKA era processing, the
data from a single SKA station (likely to contain 256 dipoles
similar to the EDA2 conﬁguration) can be processed live
through a real-time pipeline. Detection and characterisa-
tion information for transient RFI can be included in the
ﬂags for acquired data, to warn that the data may contain
RFI. For example, if future work identiﬁes which frequency
bands BGUSAT is wrongly transmitting over and out to
which distance it is typically detected, this information
can be included in the ﬂags. This can be precomputed
information and would not aﬀect the real-time acquisition
of SKA scale operations.

The potential for ‘small scale’ passive radio-interferometry

becomes apparent for surveillance purposes. If the goal is

to detect aircraft (including drones) in Western Australia,
the most cost-eﬀective architecture would be 8 - 16 EDA2
style dipole antennas, which we predict would have a range
of ∼100 km for aircraft ﬂying at 10,000 m altitude. This
provides a ﬁeld of view over 31,000 km2 or equivalent to
approximately the size of Belgium. When stealth is critical,
this passive option for surveillance is of great relevance.
If the detection of any aircraft is prioritised over stealth,
this option provides another dimension to pre-existing de-
tection techniques such as higher frequency radar, optical,
and infra-red band sensing.

To enable the workﬂow in this study to operate in a
real-time environment, there are some modiﬁcations which
will need to be made. False positives identiﬁed by the
workﬂow need to be reduced as ideally no human interven-
tion would be required to categorise a detection (currently
11% of stacks passing through the workﬂow are conﬁrmed
detections). Future eﬀorts can be focused on subtracting
static models of known astronomical radio emission before
diﬀerencing images, to reduce the eﬀect of diﬀerencing
residuals. Modelling the expected response from a reﬂec-
tion as a function of the EDA2 beam response and the
RSO position on the sky could increase the SNR of detec-
tions by ensuring the shape of the returned signal would be
consistent when stacking. A more attractive method which
may be useful for real time RSO catalogue maintenance
would be to use artiﬁcial intelligence to make detections.
To execute this additional study, a signiﬁcant observational
period would need to be acquired to train a network. Once
detections have been made, TLEs can be computed over
single passes and their accuracy improved over multiple
passes (Hennessy et al., 2021). We will also aim to detect
RSOs without prior knowledge of their expected positions,
enabling the detection of unknown and uncatalogued RSOs.
Additional observations have been made by the EDA2
and AAVS2, similar to those described in Sokolowski et al.
(2021), which will be used to test and improve this pro-
cessing ﬂow. We hope to complement this work with an
in-depth multi-frequency investigation of the passive detec-
tion of RSOs.

6. Conclusion

The trajectory of Insight’s development suggests strong
overlap with the demand for scalable and ﬂexible processing
and visualisation in the era of SKA data processing. This
proof of concept demonstrates Insight’s ability to process
a complex radio-astronomy dataset and provide the user
with the means to make intuitive processing decisions in
an interactive environment. This intimate interaction with
the dataset, through the use of the software, allowed pa-
rameter optimisation and process development which were
far more tailored than existing methods and ultimately
able to detect RSOs at a further distance than the previous
work (Tingay et al., 2020). Although this was a small-scale
dataset, it is highly complex, containing a range of diﬀerent
signal types and using Insight was highly beneﬁcial in

17

qualitatively categorising these signals through statistical
methods for the purpose of SSA. The workﬂow can be
extended to much larger scale automated processing in
the Insight framework for general purpose SSA or for
identifying speciﬁc causes of RFI such as aircraft or RSOs.

7. Acknowledgements

Data processing was run at the DUG Technology HPC
centre in Perth, Western Australia. Insight software
has been developed and is maintained by DUG Technol-
ogy whom Dylan Grigg is an employee of. This work
utilised MIRIAD (Sault et al., 1995) for the preprocessing
and the following Python modules: Skyfield (Rhodes,
2019), Astropy (Astropy Collaboration et al., 2018), and
Numpy (van der Walt et al., 2011) and we wish to acknowl-
edge the developers for their work. We acknowledge the
Wajarri Yamatji people as the traditional custodians of the
Murchison Radio Observatory site. (Lonsdale et al., 2009)

References

Astropy Collaboration, Price-Whelan, A.M., Sip˝ocz, B.M., G¨unther,
H.M., Lim, P.L., Crawford, S.M., Conseil, S., Shupe, D.L., Craig,
M.W., Dencheva, N., Ginsburg, A., VanderPlas, J.T., Bradley,
L.D., P´erez-Su´arez, D., de Val-Borro, M., Aldcroft, T.L., Cruz,
K.L., Robitaille, T.P., Tollerud, E.J., Ardelean, C., Babej, T.,
Bach, Y.P., Bachetti, M., Bakanov, A.V., Bamford, S.P., Bar-
entsen, G., Barmby, P., Baumbach, A., Berry, K.L., Biscani, F.,
Boquien, M., Bostroem, K.A., Bouma, L.G., Brammer, G.B., Bray,
E.M., Breytenbach, H., Buddelmeijer, H., Burke, D.J., Calderone,
G., Cano Rodr´ıguez, J.L., Cara, M., Cardoso, J.V.M., Cheedella,
S., Copin, Y., Corrales, L., Crichton, D., D’Avella, D., Deil, C.,
Depagne, ´E., Dietrich, J.P., Donath, A., Droettboom, M., Earl,
N., Erben, T., Fabbro, S., Ferreira, L.A., Finethy, T., Fox, R.T.,
Garrison, L.H., Gibbons, S.L.J., Goldstein, D.A., Gommers, R.,
Greco, J.P., Greenﬁeld, P., Groener, A.M., Grollier, F., Hagen,
A., Hirst, P., Homeier, D., Horton, A.J., Hosseinzadeh, G., Hu,
L., Hunkeler, J.S., Ivezi´c, ˇZ., Jain, A., Jenness, T., Kanarek, G.,
Kendrew, S., Kern, N.S., Kerzendorf, W.E., Khvalko, A., King,
J., Kirkby, D., Kulkarni, A.M., Kumar, A., Lee, A., Lenz, D.,
Littlefair, S.P., Ma, Z., Macleod, D.M., Mastropietro, M., McCully,
C., Montagnac, S., Morris, B.M., Mueller, M., Mumford, S.J.,
Muna, D., Murphy, N.A., Nelson, S., Nguyen, G.H., Ninan, J.P.,
N¨othe, M., Ogaz, S., Oh, S., Parejko, J.K., Parley, N., Pascual, S.,
Patil, R., Patil, A.A., Plunkett, A.L., Prochaska, J.X., Rastogi, T.,
Reddy Janga, V., Sabater, J., Sakurikar, P., Seifert, M., Sherbert,
L.E., Sherwood-Taylor, H., Shih, A.Y., Sick, J., Silbiger, M.T.,
Singanamalla, S., Singer, L.P., Sladen, P.H., Sooley, K.A., Sornara-
jah, S., Streicher, O., Teuben, P., Thomas, S.W., Tremblay, G.R.,
Turner, J.E.H., Terr´on, V., van Kerkwijk, M.H., de la Vega, A.,
Watkins, L.L., Weaver, B.A., Whitmore, J.B., Woillez, J., Zabalza,
V., Astropy Contributors, 2018. The Astropy Project: Building
an Open-science Project and Status of the v2.0 Core Package.
Astronomical Journal 156, 123. doi:10.3847/1538-3881/aabc4f,
arXiv:1801.02634.

Booth, R.S., Jonas, J.L., 2012. An Overview of the MeerKAT Project.

African Skies 16, 101.

Chrysostomou, A., Taljaard, C., Bolton, R., Ball, L., Breen, S.,
van Zyl, A., 2020. Operating the Square Kilometre Array: the
world’s most data intensive telescope, in: Society of Photo-Optical
Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, p. 114490X.
doi:10.1117/12.2562120.

Comrie, A., Wang, K.S., Hsu, S.C., Moraghan, A., Harris, P., Pang,
Q., Pi´nska, A., Chiang, C.C., Chang, T.H., Hwang, Y.H., Jan, H.,

Lin, M.Y., Simmonds, R., 2021. CARTA: The Cube Analysis and
Rendering Tool for Astronomy. doi:10.5281/zenodo.4905459.
van Es, A.J.J., Labate, M.G., Waterson, M.F., Monari, J., Bolli, P.,
Davidson, D., Wayth, R., Sokolowski, M., Ninni, P.D., Pupillo,
G., Macario, G., Virone, G., Ciorba, L., Paonessa, F., 2020. A
prototype model for evaluating SKA-LOW station calibration, in:
Marshall, H.K., Spyromilio, J., Usuda, T. (Eds.), Ground-based
and Airborne Telescopes VIII, International Society for Optics
and Photonics. SPIE. pp. 1449 – 1468. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1117/12.2562391, doi:10.1117/12.2562391.

Gallozzi, S., Scardia, M., Maris, M., 2020. Concerns about
ground based astronomical observations: a step to safeguard
the astronomical sky. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.10952,
doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2001.10952.

Hennessy, B., Tingay, S., Young, R., Rutten, M., Crosse, B., Han-
cock, P., Sokolowski, M., Johnston-Hollitt, M., Kaplan, D.L., 2021.
Uncued detection and initial orbit determination from short obser-
vations with the murchison wideﬁeld array. IEEE Aerospace and
Electronic Systems Magazine 36, 16–30. doi:10.1109/MAES.2021.
3097860.

Lawrence, A., Rawls, M.L., Moriba, J., Boley, A., Federico, D.V.,
Simon, G., Kramer, M., Lawler, S., Lowenthal, J., McDowell, J.,
McCaughrean, M., 2022. The case for space environmentalism.
Nature Astronomy 6, 428–435. URL: https://www.proquest.com/
scholarly-journals/case-space-environmentalism/docview/
2653413370/se-2?accountid=10382. copyright
Nature Limited 2022; Last updated - 2022-04-23.

- © Springer

van Leeuwen, T., Herrmann, F.J., 2013. Mitigating local minima in
full-waveform inversion by expanding the search space. Geophysical
Journal International 195, 661–667. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1093/gji/ggt258, doi:10.1093/gji/ggt258.

Lonsdale, C.J., Cappallo, R.J., Morales, M.F., Briggs, F.H., Benke-
vitch, L., Bowman, J.D., Bunton, J.D., Burns, S., Corey, B.E.,
deSouza, L., Doeleman, S.S., Derome, M., Deshpande, A., Gopala,
M.R., Greenhill, L.J., Herne, D.E., Hewitt, J.N., Kamini, P.A.,
Kasper, J.C., Kincaid, B.B., Kocz, J., Kowald, E., Kratzen-
berg, E., Kumar, D., Lynch, M.J., Madhavi, S., Matejek, M.,
Mitchell, D.A., Morgan, E., Oberoi, D., Ord, S., Pathikulangara,
J., Prabu, T., Rogers, A.E.E., Roshi, A., Salah, J.E., Sault, R.J.,
Shankar, N.U., Srivani, K.S., Stevens, J., Tingay, S., Vaccarella,
A., Waterson, M., Wayth, R.B., Webster, R.L., Whitney, A.R.,
Williams, A., Williams, C., 2009. The murchison wideﬁeld ar-
ray: Design overview. Proceedings of the IEEE 97, 1497–1506.
doi:10.1109/JPROC.2009.2017564.

Obenberger, K.S., Taylor, G.B., Hartman, J.M., Dowell, J., Ellingson,
S.W., Helmboldt, J.F., Henning, P.A., Kavic, M., Schinzel, F.K.,
Simonetti, J.H., Stovall, K., Wilson, T.L., 2014. Detection of Radio
Emission from Fireballs. Astrophysical Journal, Letters 788, L26.
doi:10.1088/2041-8205/788/2/L26, arXiv:1405.6772.

Prabu, S., Hancock, P., Zhang, X., Tingay, S.J., 2020. A low-
frequency blind survey of the low Earth orbit environment using
non-coherent passive radar with the Murchison wideﬁeld array.
Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia 37, e052.
doi:10.1017/pasa.2020.40, arXiv:2006.04327.

Prabu, S., Hancock, P.J., Zhang, X., Tingay, S.J., 2020. The de-
velopment of non-coherent passive radar techniques for space sit-
uational awareness with the murchison wideﬁeld array. Publica-
tions of the Astronomical Society of Australia 37. URL: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1017/pasa.2020.1, doi:10.1017/pasa.2020.1.
Rhodes, B., 2019. Skyﬁeld: High precision research-grade positions

for planets and Earth satellites generator. arXiv:1907.024.

Sault, R.J., Teuben, P.J., Wright, M.C.H., 1995. A Retrospective
View of MIRIAD, in: Shaw, R.A., Payne, H.E., Hayes, J.J.E.
(Eds.), Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems IV, p.
433. arXiv:astro-ph/0612759.

Sokolowski, M., Wayth, R.B., Bhat, N.D.R., Price, D., Broderick,
J.W., Bernardi, G., Bolli, P., Chiello, R., Comoretto, G., Crosse, B.,
et al., 2021. A southern-hemisphere all-sky radio transient monitor
for ska-low prototype stations. Publications of the Astronomical
Society of Australia 38, e023. doi:10.1017/pasa.2021.16.

Thavasimani, P., Scaife, A., 2021. Square Kilometre Array : Pro-

18

cessing Voluminous MeerKAT Data on IRIS. arXiv e-prints ,
arXiv:2105.14613arXiv:2105.14613.

Thompson, A., Moran, J., Swenson, Jr, G., 1991.

Interferome-
try and Synthesis in Radio Astronomy. volume -1. doi:10.1007/
978-3-319-44431-4.

Tingay, S.J., Goeke, R., Bowman, J.D., Emrich, D., Ord, S.M.,
Mitchell, D.A., Morales, M.F., Booler, T., Crosse, B., Wayth, R.B.,
Lonsdale, C.J., Tremblay, S., Pallot, D., Colegate, T., Wicenec,
A., Kudryavtseva, N., Arcus, W., Barnes, D., Bernardi, G., Briggs,
F., Burns, S., Bunton, J.D., Cappallo, R.J., Corey, B.E., Desh-
pande, A., Desouza, L., Gaensler, B.M., Greenhill, L.J., Hall, P.J.,
Hazelton, B.J., Herne, D., Hewitt, J.N., Johnston-Hollitt, M.,
Kaplan, D.L., Kasper, J.C., Kincaid, B.B., Koenig, R., Kratzen-
berg, E., Lynch, M.J., Mckinley, B., Mcwhirter, S.R., Morgan,
E., Oberoi, D., Pathikulangara, J., Prabu, T., Remillard, R.A.,
Rogers, A.E.E., Roshi, A., Salah, J.E., Sault, R.J., Udaya-Shankar,
N., Schlagenhaufer, F., Srivani, K.S., Stevens, J., Subrahmanyan,
R., Waterson, M., Webster, R.L., Whitney, A.R., Williams, A.,
Williams, C.L., Wyithe, J.S.B., 2013. The Murchison Wideﬁeld
Array: The Square Kilometre Array Precursor at Low Radio Fre-
quencies. Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia
30, e007. doi:10.1017/pasa.2012.007, arXiv:1206.6945.

Tingay, S.J., Sokolowski, M., Wayth, R., Ung, D., 2020. A survey
of spatially and temporally resolved radio frequency interference
in the FM band at the Murchison Radio-astronomy Observatory.
Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia 37, e039.
doi:10.1017/pasa.2020.32, arXiv:2008.05918.

Trott, C.M., Watkinson, C.A., Jordan, C.H., Yoshiura, S., Majumdar,
S., Barry, N., Byrne, R., Hazelton, B.J., Hasegawa, K., Joseph, R.,
Kaneuji, T., Kubota, K., Li, W., Line, J., Lynch, C., McKinley,
B., Mitchell, D.A., Morales, M.F., Murray, S., Pindor, B., Pober,
J.C., Rahimi, M., Riding, J., Takahashi, K., Tingay, S.J., Wayth,
R.B., Webster, R.L., Wilensky, M., Wyithe, J.S.B., Zheng, Q.,
Emrich, D., Beardsley, A.P., Booler, T., Crosse, B., Franzen,
T.M.O., Horsley, L., Johnston-Hollitt, M., Kaplan, D.L., Kenney,
D., Pallot, D., Sleap, G., Steele, K., Walker, M., Williams, A., Wu,
C., 2019. Gridded and direct Epoch of Reionisation bispectrum
estimates using the Murchison Wideﬁeld Array. Publications of
the Astronomical Society of Australia 36, e023. doi:10.1017/pasa.
2019.15, arXiv:1905.07161.

van Haarlem, M.P., Wise, M.W., Gunst, A.W., Heald, G., McKean,
J.P., Hessels, J.W.T., de Bruyn, A.G., Nijboer, R., Swinbank,
J., Fallows, R., Brentjens, M., Nelles, A., Beck, R., Falcke, H.,
Fender, R., H¨orandel, J., Koopmans, L.V.E., Mann, G., Miley,
G., R¨ottgering, H., Stappers, B.W., Wijers, R.A.M.J., Zaroubi,
S., van den Akker, M., Alexov, A., Anderson, J., Anderson, K.,
van Ardenne, A., Arts, M., Asgekar, A., Avruch, I.M., Batejat,
F., B¨ahren, L., Bell, M.E., Bell, M.R., van Bemmel, I., Bennema,
P., Bentum, M.J., Bernardi, G., Best, P., Bˆırzan, L., Bonafede,
A., Boonstra, A.J., Braun, R., Bregman, J., Breitling, F., van de
Brink, R.H., Broderick, J., Broekema, P.C., Brouw, W.N., Br¨uggen,
M., Butcher, H.R., van Cappellen, W., Ciardi, B., Coenen, T.,
Conway, J., Coolen, A., Corstanje, A., Damstra, S., Davies, O.,
Deller, A.T., Dettmar, R.J., van Diepen, G., Dijkstra, K., Donker,
P., Doorduin, A., Dromer, J., Drost, M., van Duin, A., Eisl¨oﬀel,
J., van Enst, J., Ferrari, C., Frieswijk, W., Gankema, H., Garrett,
M.A., de Gasperin, F., Gerbers, M., de Geus, E., Grießmeier,
J.M., Grit, T., Gruppen, P., Hamaker, J.P., Hassall, T., Hoeft, M.,
Holties, H.A., Horneﬀer, A., van der Horst, A., van Houwelingen,
A., Huijgen, A., Iacobelli, M., Intema, H., Jackson, N., Jelic, V.,
de Jong, A., Juette, E., Kant, D., Karastergiou, A., Koers, A.,
Kollen, H., Kondratiev, V.I., Kooistra, E., Koopman, Y., Koster,
A., Kuniyoshi, M., Kramer, M., Kuper, G., Lambropoulos, P., Law,
C., van Leeuwen, J., Lemaitre, J., Loose, M., Maat, P., Macario, G.,
Markoﬀ, S., Masters, J., McFadden, R.A., McKay-Bukowski, D.,
Meijering, H., Meulman, H., Mevius, M., Middelberg, E., Millenaar,
R., Miller-Jones, J.C.A., Mohan, R.N., Mol, J.D., Morawietz, J.,
Morganti, R., Mulcahy, D.D., Mulder, E., Munk, H., Nieuwenhuis,
L., van Nieuwpoort, R., Noordam, J.E., Norden, M., Noutsos, A.,
Oﬀringa, A.R., Olofsson, H., Omar, A., Orr´u, E., Overeem, R.,
Paas, H., Pandey-Pommier, M., Pandey, V.N., Pizzo, R., Polatidis,

19

A., Raﬀerty, D., Rawlings, S., Reich, W., de Reijer, J.P., Reitsma,
J., Renting, G.A., Riemers, P., Rol, E., Romein, J.W., Roosjen, J.,
Ruiter, M., Scaife, A., van der Schaaf, K., Scheers, B., Schellart, P.,
Schoenmakers, A., Schoonderbeek, G., Serylak, M., Shulevski, A.,
Sluman, J., Smirnov, O., Sobey, C., Spreeuw, H., Steinmetz, M.,
Sterks, C.G.M., Stiepel, H.J., Stuurwold, K., Tagger, M., Tang, Y.,
Tasse, C., Thomas, I., Thoudam, S., Toribio, M.C., van der Tol, B.,
Usov, O., van Veelen, M., van der Veen, A.J., ter Veen, S., Verbiest,
J.P.W., Vermeulen, R., Vermaas, N., Vocks, C., Vogt, C., de Vos,
M., van der Wal, E., van Weeren, R., Weggemans, H., Weltevrede,
P., White, S., Wijnholds, S.J., Wilhelmsson, T., Wucknitz, O.,
Yatawatta, S., Zarka, P., Zensus, A., van Zwieten, J., 2013. LOFAR:
The LOw-Frequency ARray. Astronomy and Astrophysics 556, A2.
doi:10.1051/0004-6361/201220873, arXiv:1305.3550.

Virtanen, P., Gommers, R., Oliphant, T.E., Haberland, M., Reddy,
T., Cournapeau, D., Burovski, E., Peterson, P., Weckesser, W.,
Bright, J., van der Walt, S.J., Brett, M., Wilson, J., Millman,
K.J., Mayorov, N., Nelson, A.R.J., Jones, E., Kern, R., Larson,
E., Carey, C.J., Polat, ˙I., Feng, Y., Moore, E.W., VanderPlas, J.,
Laxalde, D., Perktold, J., Cimrman, R., Henriksen, I., Quintero,
E.A., Harris, C.R., Archibald, A.M., Ribeiro, A.H., Pedregosa, F.,
van Mulbregt, P., SciPy 1.0 Contributors, 2020. SciPy 1.0: Fun-
damental Algorithms for Scientiﬁc Computing in Python. Nature
Methods 17, 261–272. doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2.

van der Walt, S., Colbert, S., Varoquaux, G., 2011. The numpy array:
A structure for eﬃcient numerical computation. Computing in
Science & Engineering 13, 22 – 30. doi:10.1109/MCSE.2011.37.
Wang, R., Tobar, R., Dolensky, M., An, T., Wicenec, A., Wu, C.,
Dulwich, F., Podhorszki, N., Anantharaj, V., Suchyta, E., Lao, B.,
Klasky, S., 2020. Processing Full-Scale Square Kilometre Array
Data on the Summit Supercomputer, in: SC20: International
Conference for High Performance Computing, pp. 11–22.

Wayth, R., Sokolowski, M., Broderick, J., Tingay, S.J., Bhushan, R.,
Booler, T., Chiello, R., Davidson, D.B., Emrich, D., Juswardy,
B., Kenney, D., Macario, G., Magro, A., Mattana, A., Minchin,
D., Monari, J., McPhail, A., Perini, F., Pupillo, G., Schiaﬃno,
M., Subrahmanya, R., van Es, A., Walker, M., Waterson, M.,
2021. The Engineering Development Array 2: design, performance
and lessons from an SKA-Low prototype station. arXiv e-prints ,
arXiv:2112.00908arXiv:2112.00908.

Wayth, R.B., Tingay, S.J., Trott, C.M., Emrich, D., Johnston-Hollitt,
M., McKinley, B., Gaensler, B.M., Beardsley, A.P., Booler, T.,
Crosse, B., Franzen, T.M.O., Horsley, L., Kaplan, D.L., Kenney,
D., Morales, M.F., Pallot, D., Sleap, G., Steele, K., Walker, M.,
Williams, A., Wu, C., Cairns, I.H., Filipovic, M.D., Johnston, S.,
Murphy, T., Quinn, P., Staveley-Smith, L., Webster, R., Wyithe,
J.S.B., 2018. The Phase II Murchison Wideﬁeld Array: Design
overview. Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia
35, e033. doi:10.1017/pasa.2018.37, arXiv:1809.06466.

Zhang, X., Hancock, P., Devillepoix, H.A.R., Wayth, R.B., Beardsley,
A., Crosse, B., Emrich, D., Franzen, T.M.O., Gaensler, B.M., Hors-
ley, L., Johnston-Hollitt, M., Kaplan, D.L., Kenney, D., Morales,
M.F., Pallot, D., Steele, K., Tingay, S.J., Trott, C.M., Walker, M.,
Williams, A., Wu, C., Ji, J., Ma, Y., 2018. Limits on radio emission
from meteors using the MWA. Monthly Notices of the RAS 477,
5167–5176. doi:10.1093/mnras/sty930, arXiv:1804.07060.

Zhang, X., Hancock, P., Devillepoix, H.A.R., Wayth, R.B., Beardsley,
A., Crosse, B., Emrich, D., Franzen, T.M.O., Gaensler, B.M., Hors-
ley, L., Johnston-Hollitt, M., Kaplan, D.L., Kenney, D., Morales,
M.F., Pallot, D., Steele, K., Tingay, S.J., Trott, C.M., Walker,
M., Williams, A., Wu, C., Ji, J., Ma, Y., 2018. Limits on ra-
dio emission from meteors using the MWA. Monthly Notices of
the Royal Astronomical Society 477, 5167–5176. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1093/mnras/sty930, doi:10.1093/mnras/sty930.
Zhou, H.W., Hu, H., Zou, Z., Wo, Y., Youn, O., 2018. Reverse time
migration: A prospect of seismic imaging methodology. Earth-
Science Reviews 179, 207–227. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0012825217306256, doi:https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.earscirev.2018.02.008.

