2
2
0
2

n
u
J

4

]

V
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
1
8
4
6
0
.
7
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Study on Image Filtering - Techniques,
Algorithm and Applications

Bhishman Desai1 and Manish Paliwal2 and Kapil Kumar Nagwanshi*3

1 Infogain, Mumbai, INDIA
desaibhishman1@gmail.com,
2 Pandit Deendayal Energy University, Raisan, Gandhinagar, Gujarat, INDIA
paliwalmanish1@gmail.com
3 Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
ASET, Amity University Rajasthan, Jaipur, India dr.kapil@ieee.org
∗Corresponding Author

Abstract. Image processing is one of the most immerging and widely
growing techniques making it a lively research ﬁeld. Image processing is
converting an image to a digital format and then doing diﬀerent opera-
tions on it, such as improving the image or extracting various valuable
data. Image ﬁltering is one of the fascinating applications of image pro-
cessing. Image ﬁltering is a technique for altering the size, shape, color,
depth, smoothness, and other image properties. It alters the pixels of
the image to transform it into the desired form using diﬀerent types of
graphical editing methods through graphic design and editing software.
This paper introduces various image ﬁltering techniques and their wide
applications.

Keywords: Image Processing, Noise, Biometrics, Restoration.

1

INTRODUCTION

Image ﬁltering such as smoothing an image reduces noise, blurred images can be
rectiﬁed. There are broadly two types of algorithms- linear[1,2] and non-linear[3].
Linear ﬁlter is achieved through convolution and Fourier multiplication whereas
Non-linear ﬁlter cannot be achieved through any of these. Its output is not the
linear function of its input thus, its result varies in a non-intuitive manner.
Here, the following image shows how the median ﬁlter[4] enhances the images
by reducing the noise and smoothing.

In order to do further processing like image segmentation, edge detection
etc. noise should be eliminated. Median ﬁlter is the most eﬀective non-linear
ﬁltering algorithm to detect and remove salt and pepper noise. Median ﬁlter
retains the edges of the while removing the noise that’s why it is used most
widely thus, apart from trampling the noise up to 5% to 60%, it also preserves
the image details. The noisy pixels are evaluated and labelled as noisy pixels and
the switching based median ﬁlter is applied to other pixels which are not noisy.
Bilateral ﬁlter [5] is a type of non-liner ﬁlter, it reduces noise by smoothing
and preserves edges of the images. It takes weighted sum of the pixels which are

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

Desai et al.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 1: (a)Original image , (b) Filtered image

nearby of each pixel and replaces the intensity of the pixels with the average
of that weighted sum. The neighbourhood pixels are identiﬁed through their
locations which are relative to the input pixel. Algorithms [6] used for linear
ﬁltering are: Box blur, Gaussian, bilateral and Hann window.

Fig. 2: Types of Filtering Algorithms

Image Filtering

3

In box blur [7], an image with 9x9 pixel values, can be considered having a 3x3
neighbourhood values. smoothing is achieved by averaging the neighbourhood
pixel values of the particular pixel in the output image. In this way the pixels
with higher intensity gets converted into a lower valued pixel and vice-versa
thus, balancing the image pixels. Gaussian ﬁlter is based on the equation of a
Gaussian, it can be used to generate a kernel. A kernel is a matrix (small) which
is a convoluted matrix used in various image ﬁltering techniques for embossing,
smoothing, sharpening, blurring etc. Gaussian blur can be applied for smoothing
or ﬁltering operations.

1.1 Working Example- Box Blur:

Let’s take a 9*9 image as an input for the example. Here in the input image,
90 is the peak value and also some of the holes are 0 which are black point.
Considering a 3*3 neighbourhood kernel around the pixel of which average values
will be taken. Similarly, average values around all the pixels will be calculated
by moving the kernel frame all over the input image to be able to generate newer
versions of the output image. For example, if sum around a particular pixel is
360 then the value in corresponding pixel of output image will be 40 since, there
are 9 pixels around the input pixel’s kernel. Thus, in this manner all the values
of the output matrix will be ﬁlled.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 3: (a)Input and Output image , (b) Input and Output image in shades of
gray

It can be observed from the image that the place where zero was surrounded
by 90s, in the output image is replaced by a much higher value and thus smooth-
ing intensity of the pixel. Also 90 which was surrounded by 0’s is now reduced
to 10 producing a smoothen output.

2

Image ﬁltering algorithms

2.1 Non-linear

Median Filter [4] Before proceeding for ﬁltering the image, noise should be
detected properly in order to rectify the noise and smoother the image. Following

4

Desai et al.

assumptions are made for error detection i) in an image which is noise-free edges
separate the smoothly varying areas, ii) the pixel which is noisy in the image has
uneven intensity i.e. either very low or very high in comparison of the neighbor-
hood pixels. During the impulse noise detection procedure, two image sequences
are generated. One is the series of gray-scale images, x(0)
(i,j). Here,
the ﬁrst image x(0)
(i,j) is noisy image, (i, j) is the position of pixels in the image
where 1 ≤ i ≤ M, 1 ≤ j ≤ N . Here, N and M represent direction of pixels in
vertical and horizontal direction respectively and x(n)
(i,j) is the image after nth
iteration.

(i,j), . . . , x(n)

(i,j), x(1)

Noise detection procedure:

1. Assume a window (2W + 1)x(2W + 1) around x(n−1)
(i,j)

i.e.

x(i+k,j+l)
(n−1)

where −W <= k <= W, −W <= l <= W and W >= 1.

2. Finding windows, median value m(i,j)

(n−1) ,

3. The absolute diﬀerence of x(n−1)
(i,j)

m(i,j)

(n−1) = median(x(i+k,j+l)
and m(i,j)

(n−1)

(n−1) ,

)

(cid:110)

f (i,j)
(n) =

(n−1), if |x(n−1)
f (i,j)

(i,j) − m(i,j)

(n−1)| < T 1, otherwise

4. If noise is detected in (i,j)th then the value of x(n)(I,j) will be changed as,

(i,j) = { m (i,j)
x(n)

(n−1) , if f (i,j)

(n)

(cid:54)= f (i,j)

(n−1)x(n − 1)(i, j), if f (i,j)

(n)

(cid:54)= f (i,j)
(n−1)

All these steps needed to be repeated for p times. Where p can be 2,3,4. . . .
and so on. After the pth iteration, x(p)
(i,j) are two images formed. But
for noise ﬁltering process, the binary ﬂag image f (p)
(i,j) is only required. Sun and
Neuvo introduced this median based noise-based detection and later Wang and
Zhang (PSM) modiﬁed it in a progressive manner. This method or approach is
distinct from PSM as in this method various adaptive ﬁltering approach as it
focuses and improves the ﬁlter’s ﬁltering performance.

(i,j) and f (p)

Bilateral Filtering It is a simple and non-iterative method. Bilateral ﬁltering[8]
preserves the edges while smoothing the noisy image by virtue of combination of
non-linear nearby imagee value. Based on photometric similarity and geometric
closeness. In this method, no phantom colours along the edges of the output
images are produced. Bilateral ﬁlter is similar to Gaussian convolution as it is
the average of the pixels but the bilateral ﬁlter considers the variations in inten-
sities thus, preserves the edges of the image. Bilateral ﬁltering can be justiﬁed
as when the two pixels are near to each other and they are similar in terms of
the photometric range along with the occupancies of the spatial locations which
are nearby.

Image Filtering

5

2.2 Gaussian vs. Bilateral

The heat equation or isotropic diﬀusion has a Gaussian correlation. It applies
uniformly to the picture, thereby encompassing the borders and image content.
The Gaussian and Bilateral ﬁlters are nearly identical, except that the Gaussian
inﬂects through a modulated function that determines the distance between the
center and neighboring pixels. There is no ﬁltering at the object’s boundaries
with Gaussian ﬁltering, and the ﬁlter is applied evenly throughout the picture.
On the other hand, a bilateral ﬁlter prevents blurring between objects while yet
being successful in evenly eliminating noise and so giving a superior outcome.

3 Applications

1. Image Enhancement: Image ﬁltering helps in enhancing the quality of the
image pixels. It comprises of the processes of altering the images in terms
of pixel values (blurring, smoothing etc.) irrespective of the image type i.e.
photochemical, digital or even illustration, this processing is known as photo
retouching in case of the analog image enhancing. Various softwares are
also used which encompasses three dimensional modelers, vector and raster
graphic editors. These softwares are primary tools through which an image
can be enhanced and transformed as desired[9].

Fig. 4: Noisy Image and Filtered Image

2. Denoising: A ten function is used as a range weight, while a square box
function is used as a spatial weight. The bilateral ﬁlter, unlike Gaussian
blur, delivers sharper and superior results by focusing on maintaining the
object outlines. It has many applications in ﬁelds like movie restoration and
medical imaging.

3. Image Compression: Compression can lead to partial data loss i.e., it leads to
lossy compression. But in the ﬁeld of medical image processing [10], clipart,

6

Desai et al.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 5: (a)Input image , (b) Noisy image, (c) Surface blur ﬁlter

comics, and technical drawings, lossless image data is preferred. Compres-
sion artifacts can be introduced during lossy compression methods when
short-bit rates are used. The compression, which is lossy but doesn’t create
unobtrusiveness, can be called visually lossless.

4. Texture and illumination separation: Texture and illumination separation is
done in image based modelling. The uneven texture in images is removed
by the bilateral ﬁlter successfully and also preserves the cessation which
are caused by geometrical and brightness changes. This method is inspired
from the fact that in an image, variations in brightness are much higher as
compared to that in texture patterns[11,12,2].

Fig. 6: Noisy Image and Restored Image

5. Character Recognition: It is a common procedure to digitize printed compo-
sitions with the ultimate goal that they can be altered, looked at and stored
even more ﬁrmly in machine procedures, For instance, webbased machine in-
terpretation, content todiscourse, extraction of important data and content
mining. OCR is a knoll of insight, example, and PC vision research.Early
shapes needed to be computerized with each character’s images and worked
on one text style at a time. There are some appealing techniques for copying

Image Filtering

7

engineered yields, particularly after the ﬁrst ﬁltered sheet, including sections,
images and other unprinted segments[13].

6. Signature Veriﬁcation: A computerized mark is a science scheme to speak
to an advanced correspondence’s authenticity.A lawful computerized mark
bears the beneﬁciary’s motivation to think that a perceived sender made the
message to such an extent that the sender could not refuse to send the mes-
sage with nonrepudiation and conﬁrmation and that the message was not
changed in exchange.Advanced marks are usually used to deﬁne program-
ming, budget correspondence, and in other circumstances where imperson-
ation or alteration is essential.

7. Biometrics: To depict the last class of biometrics, some researchers have in-
stituted the word behavior measurements [14,15,16,17]. The enmity of Fin-
gerprint Veriﬁcation (FVC) is an intercontinental challenge focused on eval-
uating the programming of distinctive mark conﬁrmation. A subgroup of
distinctive mark impressions was provided to enlisted people with diﬀerent
sensors allowing the parameters of distinct calculations to be changed. In-
dividuals were spoken to oﬀer enlist and match executable records of their
calculations ; the evaluation was carried out at the courtesies of the coordina-
tors using the submitted compelling documents on an appropriate database
acquired as the preparation set with the indistinguishable sensors [18,19,20].
8. Object Recognition: Item discovery is a PC innovation recognized with PC
vision and image preparation that manages to see depictions of semantic
objects of a class, such as individuals, constructions or cars in computerized
recordings and images. Well-inquired regions of discovery of article integrate
face location and recognition of walkers. Item recognition is guaranteed in
many areas of PC vision, similar to picture recovery and video observation.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 7: (a)Images in Object Recognition , (b) Face Images.

9. Face Detection: Face identiﬁcation is subject to PC technology that con-
structs nonsensical (sophisticated) photos of the dimensions and regions of
human faces [21,2].

10. Medical Applications: In particular, we attach importance to restorative im-
agery as the critical use of image handling. Despite the fact that imaging

8

Desai et al.

can be performed for medicinal subtleties of expelled organs and tissues,
such occasions are not usually referred to as therapeutic imaging, but to
some extent they are a piece of pathology.As a reprimand and in its broadest
context, it is a piece of natural imaging and includes radiology that utilizes
Xbeam radiography imaging advances, appealing reverberation imaging, ul-
trasonographic or ultrasound therapeutic material, endoscopy, elastography,
imaging, thermography, restorative and nuclear prescription helpful imaging
techniques as positron outﬂow tomography[22,23,24].

4 Conclusions

Image ﬁltering has a wide range of applications including edge detection, remov-
ing noise, sharpening and smoothing. Image ﬁltering has brought an evolutionary
change in the ﬁeld of image processing. A ﬁlter can be characterized as a kernel,
which can be deﬁned as a small array applied to every pixel and their adja-
cent neighbors in the given image. Here, in this paper we have brieﬂy explained
about the image ﬁltering and compared various algorithms. We have also brieﬂy
discussed about its various applications such as image enhancement, image com-
pression and restoration, denoising and in medical ﬁeld. When it is needed to
reduce noise while preserving the peaks and edges of the image, median and
bilateral ﬁlter is recommended. But, if only the peaks of the image are needed
to be preserved and eﬀect on the edge is not to be bothered then gaussian ﬁlter
is suﬃcient as it requires less computation comparatively. Whereas if only noise
reduction is concerned and peaks and edges are not in consideration, box ﬁlter
will suﬃce. It is recommended keeping the kernel size less than or equal to 7 for
any algorithm for optimal computational cost.

References

1. T. Kailath, “A view of three decades of linear ﬁltering theory,” IEEE Transactions

on information theory, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 146–181, 1974.

2. S. Satpathy, S. Panda, K. Nagwanshi, and C. Ardil, “Image restoration in non-
linear ﬁltering domain using mdb approach,” International Journal of Signal Pro-
cessing, vol. 6, p. 1, 2010.

3. P. Addabbo, F. Biondi, C. Clemente, D. Orlando, and L. Pallotta, “Classiﬁcation
of covariance matrix eigenvalues in polarimetric sar for environmental monitoring
applications,” IEEE Aerospace and Electronic Systems Magazine, 2019.

4. M. Juneja and R. Mohana, “An improved adaptive median ﬁltering method for
impulse noise detection,” International Journal of Recent Trends in Engineering,
vol. 1, no. 1, p. 274, 2009.

5. S. Paris, P. Kornprobst, J. Tumblin, and F. Durand, “A gentle introduction to
bilateral ﬁltering and its applications,” in ACM SIGGRAPH 2007 courses. ACM,
2007, p. 1.

6. R. Chandel and G. Gupta, “Image ﬁltering algorithms and techniques: A review,”
International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science and Software
Engineering, vol. 3, no. 10, 2013.

Image Filtering

9

7. M. Zimmer, “Blur computation algorithm,” Dec. 22 2009, uS Patent 7,636,489.
8. B. Weiss, “Fast median and bilateral ﬁltering,” Acm Transactions on Graphics

(TOG), vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 519–526, 2006.

9. A. K. Jain, Fundamentals of digital image processing.

Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ:

Prentice Hall,, 1989.

10. R. J. Schalkoﬀ, Digital image processing and computer vision. Wiley New York,

1989, vol. 286.

11. A. K. Katsaggelos, Digital image restoration. Springer Publishing Company, In-

corporated, 2012.

12. S. Satpathy, S. Panda, K. Nagwanshi, S. Nayak, and C. Ardil, “Adaptive non-linear
ﬁltering technique for image restoration,” International Journal of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 15–22, 2010.

13. A. F. Mollah, N. Majumder, S. Basu, and M. Nasipuri, “Design of an optical
character recognition system for camera-based handheld devices,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1109.3317, 2011.

14. K. K. Nagwanshi and S. Dubey, “Biometric authentication using human footprint,”
International Journal of Applied Information Systems (IJAIS)–ISSN: 2249, vol.
868, pp. 1–6, 2012.

15. K. K. Nagwanshi, M. Kumar, and S. Dubey, “Development of fuzziﬁed emotional
mobile (fem): Thought recognition through emo vtf mobile,” in 2013 International
Mutli-Conference on Automation, Computing, Communication, Control and Com-
pressed Sensing (iMac4s).

IEEE, 2013, pp. 35–39.
16. K. K. Nagwanshi and S. Dubey, “Statistical feature analysis of human footprint
for personal identiﬁcation using bigml and ibm watson analytics,” Springer Nature
Arabian Journal for Science and Engineering, vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 2703–2712, 2018.
17. K. K. Nagwanshi, “Cyber-forensic review of human footprint and gait for personal
identiﬁcation.” IAENG International Journal of Computer Science, vol. 46, no. 4,
2019.

18. K. K. Nagwanshi and S. Dubey, “Estimation of centroid, ensembles, anomaly and
association for the uniqueness of human footprint features,” International Journal
of Intelligent Engineering Informatics, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 117–137, 2020.

19. S. Basheer, K. K. Nagwanshi, S. Bhatia, S. Dubey, and G. Sinha, “Fesd: An ap-
proach for biometric human footprint matching using fuzzy ensemble learning,”
IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 26 641–26 663, 2021.

20. K. K. Nagwanshi, “An introduction to digital image watermarking,” LAP LAM-

BERT Academic Publishing (978-3-659-23715-7), 2012.

21. F. Ahmad, A. Najam, and Z. Ahmed, “Image-based face detection and recogni-

tion:” state of the art”,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1302.6379, 2013.

22. R. Raja, H. Raja, R. Patra, K. Mehta, A. Gupta, and K. R. Laxmi, “Assessment
methods of cognitive ability of human brains for inborn intelligence potential using
pattern recognitions,” in Biometric Systems, M. Sarfraz, Ed. Rijeka: IntechOpen,
2021, ch. 7. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.93268

23. M. R. Mahmood, R. K. Patra, R. Raja, and G. R. Sinha, “A novel approach
for weather prediction using forecasting analysis and data mining techniques,” in
Innovations in Electronics and Communication Engineering, H. S. Saini, R. K.
Singh, G. Kumar, G. Rather, and K. Santhi, Eds. Singapore: Springer Singapore,
2019, pp. 479–489.

24. R. K. Patra, R. Raja, T. S. Sinha, and M. R. Mahmood, “Image registration and
rectiﬁcation using background subtraction method for information security to jus-
tify cloning mechanism using high-end computing techniques,” in Proceedings of

10

Desai et al.

the Third International Conference on Computational Intelligence and Informat-
ics, K. S. Raju, A. Govardhan, B. P. Rani, R. Sridevi, and M. R. Murty, Eds.
Singapore: Springer Singapore, 2020, pp. 829–837.

