2
2
0
2

g
u
A
3

]
I

N
.
s
c
[

1
v
7
7
1
2
0
.
8
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

On the Integration of Blockchain and SDN:
Overview, Applications, and Future Perspectives

Anichur Rahman1, Antonio Montieri2,(cid:63), Dipanjali Kundu1,
Md. Razaul Karim3, Md. Jahidul Islam4, Umme Sara1,
Alfredo Nascita2, and Antonio Pescap´e2

1 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of Textile
Engineering and Research (NITER), Constituent Institute of Dhaka University,
Savar, Dhaka-1350, Bangladesh
{anis cse,dipanjali kundu,ummesara}@niter.edu.bd
2 University of Napoli Federico II, Italy
{antonio.montieri,alfredo.nascita,pescape}@unina.it
3 Mawlana Bhashani Science and Technology University, Tangail, Bangladesh
razaulce15004@gmail.com
4 Green University of Bangladesh, Dhaka, Bangladesh
jahidul.jnucse@gmail.com

Abstract. Blockchain (BC) and Software-Deﬁned Networking (SDN)
are leading technologies which have recently found applications in several
network-related scenarios and have consequently experienced a growing
interest in the research community. Indeed, current networks connect a
massive number of objects over the Internet and in this complex sce-
nario, to ensure security, privacy, conﬁdentiality, and programmability,
the utilization of BC and SDN have been successfully proposed. In this
work, we provide a comprehensive survey regarding these two recent re-
search trends and review the related state-of-the-art literature. We ﬁrst
describe the main features of each technology and discuss their most
common and used variants. Furthermore, we envision the integration of
such technologies to jointly take advantage of these latter eﬃciently. In-
deed, we consider their group-wise utilization—named BC-SDN—based
on the need for stronger security and privacy. Additionally, we cover the
application ﬁelds of these technologies both individually and combined.
Finally, we discuss the open issues of reviewed research and describe po-
tential directions for future avenues regarding the integration of BC and
SDN.
To summarize, the contribution of the present survey spans from an
overview of the literature background on BC and SDN to the discussion
of the beneﬁts and limitations of BC-SDN integration in diﬀerent ﬁelds,
which also raises open challenges and possible future avenues examined
herein. To the best of our knowledge, compared to existing surveys, this
is the ﬁrst work that analyzes the aforementioned aspects in light of a
broad BC-SDN integration, with a speciﬁc focus on security and privacy
issues in actual utilization scenarios.

Keywords: Blockchain · Software Deﬁned Networking · BC-SDN Inte-
gration · Security · Privacy · Conﬁdentiality · Internet of Things.

(cid:63) Corresponding author.

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

1

A. Rahman et al.

Introduction

With the growing amount of always-online connected devices, the challenges to
face within modern network environments have also grown. It is estimated that
nowadays 30 billion devices are connected over the Internet and this number
will reach 75 billion worldwide by 2025 [1]. This increase of devices is creating
a massive number of issues such as attacks against the networking systems,
data theft, addressing issues, sensors’ energy consumption and battery loss, etc.
Moreover, after the revolution of Industry 3.0 and 4.0 [2], the Internet is no
longer only a medium to exchange ﬁles or emails but it is the enabler of several
safety-critical operations which makes these issues much more urgent. Thus, the
handling of such safety-critical operations must be carried out to properly utilize
the data generated by several devices interconnected over the network [3].

Software-Deﬁned Networking is an interesting paradigm that can be used
to enhance and manage various security aspects in modern networks such as
Internet of Things (IoT) environments. For instance, to provide better system
security, it is necessary to permit the use of resources only among authorized
users [4]. This limits the possibility that third-party users get control over the
system and lowers the frequency of attacks [5]. Further, the large number of con-
nected devices creates a huge amount of data passing from one system segment to
another, producing enormous traﬃc in turn. As conventional networking devices
such as routers or switches have to make choices and then monitor the traﬃc
ﬂow, the overall speed of operations is slower. In this sense, the SDN paradigm
with the OpenFlow protocol allows the SDN controller to link to other devices
and separates hardware from software [6]. Indeed, the SDN controller can incor-
porate a constructive or reactive mechanism to remove or even change the traﬃc
ﬂow via a ﬂow table. The transmitted traﬃc is then handled in the so-called con-
trol layer [7], which can also protect the networking devices from internal and
external attacks.

Blockchain is another technology that can be a possible solution to enforce a
veriﬁcation system at every edge and handle trust-management issues to make
the system robust against various attacks [8] and to ensure block validation us-
ing encryption or consensus mechanisms [9]. BC provides a Peer-to-peer (P2P)
communication system that maintains a database for all members of the net-
work where every record about the connection establishment is easily stored and
properly maintained. In addition, the chain of blocks can not be easily modiﬁed:
changes are possible when proper validation is ensured, and only in this case a
new block can be included in the BC [10]. Furthermore, it ensures authenticity
and conﬁdentiality to the data transmitted among network nodes.

Given the high interest that BC and SDN technologies have generated in
the research community (and more recently also in the industry), our research
aims to provide insights and guidelines to foster their fruitful integration (i.e.
BC-SDN). More speciﬁcally, in this survey, we seek answers to the following
research questions:

RQ1. BC-SDN Ecosystem: What are the key features and beneﬁts of the BC-

SDN integration as investigated in state-of-art works?

RQ2. Security and Privacy in BC-SDN: Which are the main security and pri-
vacy threats aﬀecting BC and SDN? How have they been faced in literature
by exploiting the integration of both technologies?

On the Integration of Blockchain and SDN

3

Table 1. Related surveys regarding SDN and BC. The works are grouped based on
the related technology and reported in chronological order within each group.

Tech Ref. Year Main Topic

SDN

[11] 2021 Solutions to cyber defence on SDN based systems with taxonomy.
[12] 2021 Security and Privacy concerns of Controllers of SDN.
[13] 2021 SDN based Security for 5G framework.
[14] 2021 Survey of Solution to DDoS and DoS attack in SDN.
[15] 2021 SDN-based systematic review for edge and cloud computing in IoT.
[16] 2021 SDN framework for smart industrial IoT environment.
[17] 2019 Integration of SDN and Smart Building.
[18] 2019 Application of SDN for improving security in computer networks.
[19] 2018 SDN-NFV framework for ensuring security in IoT environment.
[20] 2018 Security aspects and open challenges of SDN technology.

BC

[21] 2021 Management and Improvement of information systems security using BC.
[22] 2021 Analysis of the evolution, security of the BC technology.
[23] 2021 Aspects of BC with future research scopes.
[24] 2021 A survey of the application of BS speciﬁcially in decentralization method.
[25] 2021 BC for addressing challenges and security aspects in IIoT.
[26] 2021 Integration of IoT and BC for enhancing security.
[27] 2020 Improvements in Industry 4.0 by integrating BC technology.
[28] 2020 Approaches for enhancing security in BC technology.
[29] 2020 Security issues of IoT and solutions provided by BC technology.
[30] 2019 Classiﬁcation of security vulnerabilities in BC technology.
[31] 2019 Privacy issues associated with BC-based applications.
[32] 2018 Applications and challenges of BC for IoT and other paradigms.
[33] 2018 Proof- and voting-based algorithms for consensus in BC technology.
[34] 2018 BC-based approaches for diﬀerent security services.
[35] 2018 Overview of BC technology and classiﬁcation of its threat models.
[36] 2018 BC-based security techniques designed for, or applicable to IoT.

RQ3. Application of BC-SDN: Which are the most relevant applications that

can beneﬁt from BC-SDN?

RQ4. Future Challenges: What are the challenges to deal with in the near fu-
ture for integrating BC-SDN with emerging technologies in computational
intelligence?

1.1 Related Surveys

The present survey discusses essential information related to both SDN and BC
considering also their security and privacy aspects as well as their applications.
In the last years, many works have focused on these technologies proving that
they are heavily attracting the interest of the research community. Hereinafter,
we review the most recent surveys (published within the last ﬁve years) regarding
such technologies and their integration, brieﬂy discussing the aspects on which
each work is focused.5

SDN. In [37], the authors discuss the 5G network softwarization and slicing
strategy based on SDN and Network Function Virtualization (NFV) technolo-
gies. Diﬀerent industrial initiatives and projects, their requirements, and various
architectural approaches for 5G networks are also described. Similarly, Bannour
et al. [38] focus on the SDN approach and particularly on distributed SDN con-
trollers. Improving the security of the SDN environment and especially of SDN
controllers is the main topic of the work in [39]. Additionally, Bizanis et al. [40]

5 When a work covers diﬀerent technologies, we categorize it based on its main topic.

4

A. Rahman et al.

propose the joint utilization of SDN and network virtualization technologies to
bring several functionalities to IoT applications. In [41], a brief discussion on
SDN control plane focusing on scalability issues is presented. The authors also
develop diﬀerent controller design schemes such as ﬂat, hierarchical, and hybrid
controllers. Furthermore, in [42], the authors present a strategy for smart homes
using SDN that ensures the privacy of the system. The authentication of user
is accomplished by encryption procedure based on a symmetric key protocol. In
another SDN-IoT integration-based work [43], the authors suggest to integrate
SDN and IoT to develop an intelligent framework that is capable of providing
solutions to diﬀerent problems related to Industry 4.0 applications that have
arisen during the Covid-19 pandemic.

Blockchain. Tariq and al. [44] propose to leverage BC to manage several applica-
tions such as Wireless Sensor Networks, Vehicular Ad-hoc Networks (VANets),
IoT, and healthcare systems. They review the existing problems, their solutions,
and possible security issues. Besides, Deepa et al. [45] integrate these studies
presenting diﬀerent approaches for potential integration of Big Data applica-
tions with BC technology. More recently, the survey in [46] discusses diﬀerent
case studies of practical usage of BC for healthcare data management systems.
The integration of BC within IoT systems is analyzed in [47] where the authors
propose the deﬁnition of Blockchain of Things to name the synthesis of BC into
5G and industrial applications. Also, the survey in [21] focuses on the manage-
ment of information system using BC with particular attention on the security
issues. Similarly, Bhutta et al. [22] present the evolution of BC technology along
with the speciﬁc security measures introduced, while Hewa et al. [23] discuss the
technical aspects of BC focusing on its future scopes.

Integration of BC and SDN. Wadhwa et al. [48] investigate healthcare systems
enriched with the integration of BC and SDN. They describe various use cases
where the beneﬁts of these two technologies can be fruitfully leveraged. With a
speciﬁc eye on security, in [49], the authors discuss SDN-based Intrusion Detec-
tion Systems in BC applications. Likewise, Alharbi [50] takes into account BC
to protect the SDN environment, also assessing the feasibility of this powerful
integration.

For the sake of completeness, other related surveys on BC and SDN—not
detailed in the present subsection for brevity—are reported in Tab. 1, which
groups them based on the related technology and summarizes the main topics
covered by each work.

Positioning of Our Survey. In the present survey, we aim to investigate the inte-
gration of BC and SDN technologies with an eye on security and privacy issues in
real applications. To the best of our knowledge, this study is the ﬁrst survey that
takes into account BC and SDN technologies by providing details on both their
main features and deepening their eﬀective integration along with actual use
cases. As reported in previous paragraphs and further summarized in Tab. 1, we
analyze in a systematic manner diﬀerent aspects scattered across previous works.
Indeed, unlike the works investigating the application of BC or SDN alone, we
ﬁrstly provide an overview of BC and SDN applications underlining their secu-
rity and privacy aspects, then we discuss the BC-SDN integration by analyzing
the peculiarities and (security) issues deriving from it. In this regard, comparing

On the Integration of Blockchain and SDN

5

Fig. 1. Road map of the present survey.

our survey with recent ones covering BC-SDN [48,49,50], (i) we expressly make
BC-SDN the main pillar of our investigation (diﬀerently than [49]) and we do
not narrow our dissertation to (ii) speciﬁc use cases (e.g., healthcare [48]) or
(iii) particular aspects of interest (e.g., implementation feasibility [50]).

1.2 Contributions and Organization of the Survey

In this work, we discuss SDN and BC leading technologies and their fruitful inte-
gration. In detail, we provide an extensive analysis of their features, security and
privacy issues, and applications. Finally, we discuss open challenges and future
perspectives. We also consider valuable beneﬁts achieved with the integration
of these technologies in order to better support applications in many ﬁelds. To
summarize, in this survey, we oﬀer the following contributions:

Top to BottomBackground OverviewIntegration of Blockchain with SDNSecurity and Privacy Issues in BC-SDN SystemsNotable ApplicationsChallenges and Integration with Emerging TechnologiesConclusionSoftware Defined NetworkingData PlaneControl PlaneApplication PlaneMotivationsState-of-Art ProposalsSecurity and Privacy Issues in BlockchainForking AttacksSelfish MiningSocial EngineeringSecurity Management in SDNSecurity and Privacy Issues of BC-SDNBlockchain ApplicationsBC-SDN ApplicationsBlockchain for Big Data AnalysisBlockchain for RoboticsAdvanced services via Holochain with AI-enabled BCMachine and Deep Learning with BlockchainBlockchainKey Aspects of BlockchainTypes of BlockchainAttaining Consensus in BlockchainMajority Attacks (51% Attack)Other IssuesAim and Challenges of BC-SDN for SecurityConfidentiality and Privacy in BC-SDNPrivacy in Blockchain: Confidentiality and AuthenticationAuthorizationLimitations and Challenges6

A. Rahman et al.

Table 2. List of acronyms in alphabetical order.

Acronyms Deﬁnitions

ACL
AI
API
BC
DDoS
DL
IDS
ML
NFV
P2P
PoS
PoW
SC
SDN
SPBFT
VANET

Access Control List
Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Application Programming Interface
Blockchain
Distributed Denial of Service
Deep Learning
Intrusion Detection System
Machine Learning
Network Function Virtualization
Peer to Peer
Proof of Stake
Proof of Work
Smart Contract
Software-Deﬁned Networking
Simpliﬁed Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance
Vehicular Ad hoc Network

– We discuss the state-of-art literature and provide a general overview about

BC and SDN.

– We present the eﬀective beneﬁts of the integration of SDN with BC; we also

investigate its existing and upcoming features.

– We discuss security and privacy issues of BC and SDN and their integration

(i.e. BC-SDN).

– We review the applications of these technologies in diﬀerent ﬁelds.
– Finally, we describe issues, open challenges, and future investigations related

to considered technologies.

In view of these aims, we review recent papers related to BC and SDN, and
their integration by considering state-of-art proposals (with related motivations)
and focusing on their features and beneﬁts, as well as security and privacy con-
cerns. Moreover, we review articles related to real application scenarios of BC-
SDN as an extension of their individual application ﬁelds. In particular, we have
selected such studies prioritizing more relevant ones (i.e. those deepening secu-
rity and privacy aspects or describing actual use cases) published in the last ﬁve
years (see e.g. Tab. 3).

The remainder of this survey is organized as follows: Section 2 presents a
general overview of analyzed technologies (i.e. BC and SDN). Section 3 intro-
duces the motivations behind the BC-SDN integration also reviewing state-of-art
proposals. The security and privacy issues in BC and in the aforementioned inte-
gration are discussed in Sec. 4, Successively, the applications of BC and BC-SDN
are presented in Sec. 5. Furthermore, in Sec. 6, we focus on the current research
challenges and future directions for the eﬀective employment of considered tech-
nologies. Finally, we conclude the survey in Sec. 7. To ease readers, Fig. 1 depicts
the road map of the present survey. Also, Tab. 2 summarizes the acronyms used
in the text for readability.

2 Background Overview

This section focuses on some key aspects of BC and SDN providing an useful
overview of these technologies. Section 2.1 describes diﬀerent types of BC, its

On the Integration of Blockchain and SDN

7

Fig. 2. Structure of each block constituting a Blockchain.

key aspects, and methods for attaining consensus in transactions. In Sec. 2.2,
the SDN paradigm is discussed, describing the properties of the three planes (i.e.
data, control, and application) SDN is made of.

2.1 Blockchain

BC technology was ﬁrstly introduced by Satoshi Nakamoto (pseudonym) in 2008
and it is currently exploited in numerous applications. A BC is a decentral-
ized and distributed ledger and every participant can authenticate it without
the interference of any central authority or special individual which provides a
clearinghouse service verifying and clearing all transactions. Therefore, the BC
is assembled independently by every node in the network. Each block records
some or all most recent transactions that have not been recorded in a previous
block. As shown in Fig. 2, each block consists of (i) the block header encom-
passing current and prior cryptographic block hash values, a timestamp, and
a nonce; (ii) the main body encompassing transaction hash value, sender and
receiver identity, and signature for each transaction. The users who share their
computing power to verify if the transactions in the blocks are legitimate in ex-
change for a reward are called miners. They have to resolve a statistical problem
based on the calculation of a cryptographic hash function to conﬁrm the latest
transactions and list all of them within the global ledger. Normally, a block is
extracted every 5 to 10 minutes.

The newly mined block is attached to the BC once the majority of its partic-
ipants agree that it is valid; in other words, adding a new block requires to reach
a consensus among the miners (also called nodes in this context). More specif-
ically, the consensus is an artifact of the asynchronous interaction of thousands
of independent nodes, all following simple rules. The most common consensus
algorithms are the Proof of Work (PoW) and the Proof of Stake (PoS) in which
the miners needs to provide a certain proof that must be validated by other
nodes in the network to be allowed to publish (cf. Sec. 2.1).

It is worth underlining that blocks can only be added and not modiﬁed.
Indeed, after a block is added to the BC, modifying data in a block of the chain
is an extremely challenging task because it requires changing all of the following
blocks. Therefore, the BC ledger becomes more and more immutable as time
passes.

8

A. Rahman et al.

Fig. 3. Opportunities and challenges in Blockchain network.

To summarize, in Fig. 3, we provide a diagram reporting the opportunities
(shown on the left side) and the related challenges (shown on the right side)
related to the utilization of the BC technology. We can notice that if on the
one hand, the opportunities and advantages of utilizing the BC are enormous,
on the other hand obstacles and challenges must be carefully considered and
mitigated to fully exploit BC potential especially in dynamic and controllable
environments (as for instance in software-deﬁned networks).

Key Aspects of Blockchain. Hereinafter, we describe the main features that
characterize a generic BC.

Decentralization. BC has a distributed and decentralized structure [51] where
there is no central node or trust authority to store data or determine the transac-
tion validity and order. Moreover, BC does not apply any set of rules to establish
the transactions or regulating the way nodes interact. Otherwise, consensus is
reached via the interplay of thousands of independent nodes independently ver-
ifying a set of criteria.

Transparency. BC is transparent in recording new data and also in updating
them because the system itself validates and authenticates transactions. Third
party or malicious users can not include fake transactions into the ledger.

Autonomy. The main objective of BC is to switch the trust from one centralized
authority to the asynchronous network of nodes [52]. As discussed before, based
on the consensus algorithm, every node can transfer and securely update data
without any interference.

On the Integration of Blockchain and SDN

9

Immutability. Records are immutably stored forever in blocks unless someone
tries to alter them. Indeed, the consensus mechanism is theoretically vulnerable
to attacks by miners attempting to use their hashing power to malicious ends.
Indeed, if a miner acting as an attacker or intruder can control the majority (i.e.
51%) of the total network mining power, he can attack the consensus mechanism
so as to disrupt the security and availability of the BC. For instance, an attacker
can cause previously conﬁrmed blocks to be invalidated by forking below them
and re-converging on an alternate chain [53]. Actually, given the massive increase
of total hashing power, this possibility is almost zero also for a pool of malicious
miners.

Anonymity. One of the key characteristics of BC is that it allows the users to
perform pseudonymous transactions that are also veriﬁable and thus trusted.
Firstly, BC users are identiﬁed via a public address which does not contain any
identiﬁable information to tie the address or the user. Also, BC solves the trust
issue from node to node. When a node transfers data or (crypto-)money toward
another node, no one traces the origin and other nodes: all the details remain
hidden and are recorded into the ledger.

Open Source Implementation. Several BC open-source projects have been launched
in the open-source community since BC inception. Open source BC platforms
enable autonomous developers to create decentralized applications based on BC
technology which can be exploited by every interested user and are characterized
by publicly veriﬁed records.

Types of Blockchain. In the following, we discuss four diﬀerent categories in
which BC technologies can be divided based on their structural characteristics.

Public Blockchain. A public BC is fully open source. Anyone can participate as a
user, developer, or community member, without restrictions on new participants.
Figure 4a sketches the structure of a public BC and shows the end users and their
connections. All of them are acting as a block of the public ledger. The general
user can have diﬀerent nature and computational capabilities (e.g., a server
or a smartphone user). A public BC is also transparent because each member
can independently access transaction details and control how the state of the
BC evolves, and it is fully decentralized because no one centrally regulates the
transactions. Also, anyone can join the public BC network regardless of location
or nationality, and the authorities can hardly shut down the accounts given their
(pseudo-)anonymity. Common examples of public BCs are Bitcoin, Ethereum,
and Litecoin.

Private Blockchain. A private BC is characterized by a single organization which
has the sole control over the rules of the BC. Therefore, the participation is re-
stricted by the authority which is in charge of managing and accessing the data.
Figure 4b depicts the structure of a private BC. The central web-like structure
is the representation of the logical connectivity of the blocks. Unlike the public
one, the private BC has restrictions on the access of the transactions and related
information. Private BCs are indeed meant for a company who would like to
collaborate and promote data but does not want that sensitive information is
exposed on the public BC. The entities operating in private BCs have full control

10

A. Rahman et al.

(a) Public Blockchain.

(b) Private Blockchain.

(c) Consortium Blockchain.

(d) Hybrid Blockchain.

Fig. 4. Types of Blockchain.

of members and governance systems. Commonly, private BCs have a token asso-
ciated with the chain and are used in supply chain management, digital identity,
vote counting, asset ownership, hyperledger, etc. Given its more centralized na-
ture, for most applications, a private BC could replace a decentralized database.
Moreover, a private BC can be also used for educational purposes.

Consortium Blockchain. A consortium BC has a selected group of participants
(e.g., several organizations) called consortium or federation, which cooperate
with the aim of taking advantage from BC capabilities (e.g., deﬁning a system
to reach consensus between organizations). Figure 4c shows the general struc-
ture of a consortium BC. The major advantage of this type of BC over a private
BC is that it depends on (and is managed by) several organizations instead of
only one. Users in the consortium can operate or run a node, can make transac-
tions, and audit the BC. Commonly, participants can be individuals coming from
banks, government, or supply chain management systems. Common examples of
consortium BCs are Hyperledger and Corda.

Hybrid Blockchain. A hybrid BC tries to exploit the best aspects of the other
types of BC (i.e. public, private, and consortium) to overcome their weaknesses
and provide an eﬃcient solution for trustworthy data sharing, access manage-
ment, etc. Figure 4d outlines the structure of a hybrid BC. As shown in the
ﬁgure, the blocks could be both restricted or public. Thus, an authority can
make the transaction ledger available to the users based on their needs. With

On the Integration of Blockchain and SDN

11

this type of BC, it is simpler to operate the business thanks to its functionalities
that also preserve security and privacy. Indeed, it is more ﬂexible and transpar-
ent for the business purpose to keep the data private and allows to decide what
portion of data shall be made public. Nowadays, hybrid BCs are mainly used for
data protection as in IoT networks and supply chain management systems.

Attaining Consensus in Blockchain. As discussed above, consensus algo-
rithms are of paramount importance in a BC: they are used to decide how a new
block is veriﬁed and added to the chain. Hereinafter, we discuss two common
types of consensus algorithm: proof-based and voting-based [33].

Proof of Work (Pow). PoW is a proof-based consensus algorithm in which miners
need to prove that they have done a certain amount of computing work to be
allowed to publish. In detail, the PoW is included in a new block and acts as
proof that the miner spent signiﬁcant computing eﬀort. PoW requires to solve
a complex mathematical problem [54] based on a hash-cryptography puzzle.
The latter needs signiﬁcant computational power to be solved but its solution
can be quickly veriﬁed. Miners compete each other for accomplishing this task,
and when a miner obtains a solution, the latter is broadcast to the network.
All other miners then verify if the solution is correct, and in this case the new
block is added to the chain. The competition to solve the PoW algorithm to
earn reward and the right to record transactions on the BC is the basis for BC
security model [53]. For instance, PoW can be used to prevent cyber-attacks
such as Distributed Denial-of-Service (DDoS) that would be ineﬃcient since the
cost incurred for exhausting BC resources via the DDoS would be signiﬁcantly
greater than the potential rewards for attacking the network.

Proof of Stake (PoS). PoS is a proof-based consensus algorithm mainly used in
public BC, which aims to overcome the unfairness of PoW. Indeed, the latter
favors miners having more powerful equipment, which can thus ﬁnd a suitable
solution to the cryptography puzzle easier than other miners with less powerful
equipment. More speciﬁcally, PoS is based on the idea that a miner who owns
much stake (i.e. the percentage of coins held) would be more trustful. PoS is
considered as less risky in terms of revenue for miners to attack the network, as
it structures compensation in a way that makes an attack less advantageous for
a malicious miner.

Voting-based Consensus. Voting-based consensus algorithms presume that the
nodes should be known, in contrast to proof-based algorithms where nodes can
freely join or leave the network. Therefore, they are more suited to private or
consortium BCs. Furthermore, the nodes have to both maintain the ledger (as in
proof-based) and jointly verify new blocks via a voting mechanism (diﬀerently
than proof-based). Each node communicates with other nodes to decide if adding
the new block to the chain: a certain number of nodes (depending on the speciﬁc
voting mechanism) have to verify the same proposed block before validation.

2.2 Software Deﬁned Networking

In conventional systems, network connections are established via switches and
routers, which are also responsible for transmitting data over the network. Such

12

A. Rahman et al.

Fig. 5. General SDN architecture.

a networking scheme may be subject to lack of conﬁdentiality and then could
be prone to third-party attacks. For these reasons, the development of the SDN
paradigm is crucial. SDN is a networking strategy that eﬃciently provides the
facility of a centralized environment and aims to decouple data transfer process
from the devices designed for it [6]. This paradigm is based on the existence
of diﬀerent planes, each responsible for some speciﬁc functions: (i) the data
plane is responsible for packet forwarding, (ii) the control plane decides on rout-
ing using a ﬂow table containing rules to properly manage incoming packets,
and (iii) the application plane encompasses the services made available to the
users. It is worth noting that ﬂow rules can be easily changed according to the
needs [55] by exploiting the improved programmability and control provided by
SDN compared to conventional networking systems [56]. OpenFlow is the most
known protocol used for the communication between the switches and the central
controller in SDN environments (despite it still has some vulnerabilities [57]).
Figure 5 depicts the structure of a common SDN architecture, whose planes and
related interconnections are described hereinafter.

Data Plane. The data plane (also known as edge or infrastructure plane as re-
ported in Fig. 5) is the lowest plane of an SDN architecture and comprises the
devices used for data forwarding such as switches (physical or virtual), access
points, routers, etc. The communication between the data plane and the con-
trol plane is established with the OpenFlow protocol through the Southbound
Application Programming Interface (API) commonly using encrypted channels.
The data plane performs packet forwarding based on the ﬂow rules providing
forwarding logic, which are deﬁned according to the OpenFlow speciﬁcation and
installed through the Southbound API by the control plane [58]. Flow rules
include MAC and IP destination addresses, transport-layer source and destina-
tion ports, and other necessary information for matching the desired packets.

On the Integration of Blockchain and SDN

13

Notably, OpenFlow rules can be exploited to implement ﬁrewalls and enforce
various security policies.

Control Plane. The control plane is the middle (viz. backbone) plane in an SDN
architecture. It is considered as the brain of the networking system [55] and is
in charge of managing the routing process. In more detail, the control plane en-
compasses logic and functional controllers applied to manage the control logic at
diﬀerent levels and to provide controlling functionalities, respectively. As shown
in Fig. 5, its core can be realized via diﬀerent OpenFlow-compliant implementa-
tions (e.g., NOX, POX, Beacon, Floodlight, etc.) [41]. It is connected with the
application plane through the Northbound API and with data plane through the
Southbound API. Additionally, two other interfaces are the Eastbound API and
the Westbound API used for the communication between multiple distributed
controllers [59]. It is worth noticing that the control plane provides several en-
hanced network services which oﬀer improved management, QoS, and data pri-
vacy and security to the network infrastructure.

Application Plane. The application plane is the topmost plane of an SDN archi-
tecture. It includes programs to control the networking system and establishes a
connection with the control plane using the Northbound API (usually a RESTful
API). It also provides higher-level services to the SDN users and applications
running on top of existing controller platforms. In detail, from this plane, ap-
plications transmit their requirements to the SDN controller where they are
processed and then translated into commands and rules for the data plane de-
vices of the SDN architecture. Some of the most common SDN applications are
routing, load balancing, and ﬁrewalling [38].

3

Integration of Blockchain with SDN

This section describes the integration of SDN and BC technologies, whose fun-
damentals have been provided in Sec. 2. Figure 6 depicts a common scenario in
which both public and private BCs are integrated in a multi-domain network
deﬁned via the SDN paradigm. Each domain uses a distinct SDN controller,
which communicates with the others via a P2P connection. Speciﬁcally, Sec. 3.1
reports reasons why researchers have proposed this integration and Sec. 3.2 col-
lects state-of-art proposals. We point the interested reader to the speciﬁc works
reviewed hereinafter, each proposing a particular realization of the general sce-
nario exempliﬁed in Fig. 6 to fulﬁll the diﬀerent needs (e.g., reducing latency,
optimizing resource usage, guaranteeing security and privacy) of considered ap-
plication scenarios.

3.1 Motivations

In modern networks (e.g., always online smartphones, IoT sensors), the enormous
number of interconnected devices produces a considerable amount of data gath-
ered from the actual world. In this scenario, a urgent need to properly manage
data arises and SDN is proposed as a solution because it can programmatically
handle all the data received from the network environment [60]. Altering the base
architecture of a network system is a challenging task; SDN makes it much easier

14

A. Rahman et al.

Fig. 6. Example of the integration of Blockchain with SDN.

and allows to quickly modify network characteristics. Researchers are prompted
to take advantage of the capabilities of the SDN paradigm that can be exploited
to performs distinct operations on the data based on the speciﬁc layer on which
they operate [61].

Unfortunately, the communication among SDN planes is not fully secured
and hence its adoption could lead to a corrupted network system due to mali-
ciously wrong information exchanged [62]. To enhance the security and reliability
of SDN networks, BC could eﬃciently help in checking the authenticity of trans-
missions [63,64,65]. Moreover, the addition of Smart Contracts (SCs) into the BC
validation process makes this technology even more trustworthy [66]. Besides,
BC keeps the history of transaction in an immutable ledger that can prevent any
third party interaction and tampering. However, on the one hand, BC can take
the responsibility of the security of data transmission but on the other hand, it
can not manage the data from IoT directly. Therefore, the integration of SDN
and BC has been pursued to jointly take advantage of the peculiarities of both
technologies.

3.2 State-of-Art Proposals

We now discuss the research works that have proposed the joint usage of BC
and SDN. Many researchers have suggested diﬀerent BC-SDN architectures to
guarantee latency, network performance, resource usage, security, and other de-
sirable features [67,68,69,70,71,72,73]. In the following, we go into details of such
works.

Xie et al. [74] leverage SDN for 5G VANETs and show that their BC-based
IoT network can unveil malicious vehicular nodes and messages. Similarly, Zhang
et al. [70] also introduce a distributed BC-based software-deﬁned VANET frame-
work for smart cities named Block-SDV. In detail, Block-SDV integrates a novel

On the Integration of Blockchain and SDN

15

deep Q-learning approach to solve the optimization problem of ﬁnding the op-
timal features for BC (e.g., trust features of BC nodes, number of consensus
nodes, trust features of each vehicle, and computational capability of BC). The
eﬀectiveness of Block-SDV and related deep Q-learning is demonstrated in a
simulation environment. Gao et al. [75] present a trust-based model to detect
malicious activities integrating BC and SDN to improve security in 5G and fog
VANET networks. The joint adoption of BC and SDN technologies have been
also exploited for the design of Intrusion Detection Systems (IDSs) employed
in the control framework of industries [72]. Houda et al. [68] propose a BC-
based architecture named Cochain-SC, having two levels of attack mitigation:
intra-domain and inter-domain DDoS mitigation in SDN. More speciﬁcally, the
combination of intra entropy-based, intra Bayes-based, and intra-domain miti-
gation schemes is used to classify and mitigate the impact of malicious traﬃc.
Furthermore, for inter-domain, the authors introduced an SC-based architecture
that considered Ethereum technology to simplify the collaboration among SDN-
based Autonomous Systems against DDoS attacks. Finally, the performance of
their proposal is assessed based on eﬃciency, ﬂexibility, security, and cost eﬀec-
tiveness.

Sharma et al. [67] propose the DistBlockNet architecture that allows the co-
operation of SDN and BC in an IoT network. The authors devise a strategy
for updating and formalizing the ﬂow rule table applying a BC, and evaluate
the performance according to various metrics showing better results compared
to previous works. Rahman et al. [61] present DistBlockBuilding, a distributed
BC-SDN architecture for smart cities, designing also a cluster-head selection
algorithm for collecting sensors data with low energy dissipation. The authors
evaluate the performance with diﬀerent parameters such as throughput, latency,
and packet arrival rate. Chaudhary et al. [76] leverage the beneﬁts of BC tech-
nologies for the transportation network and use SDN to provide low power con-
sumption and legitimate resources. Secure and reliable energy management is
also considered in [77] where the authors design a cyber-secure decentralized
framework to ensure reliability, eﬃciency, and sustainability jointly using SDN
and BC.

With a speciﬁc focus on fog environments, Muthanna et al. [69] introduce
an IoT-based fog system that incorporates BC and SDN. In detail, SDN can at-
tain high privacy, availability, and security for IoT-based applications, while BC
assures decentralization in a secure way. Furthermore, they investigate latency,
network eﬃciency, and resource utilization for the experimental evaluation of
their architecture. Similarly, Sharma et al. [73] present a novel BC-based dis-
tributed cloud architecture with fog nodes acting as SDN controller at the edge
of the network, thus proposing an innovative combination of fog computing,
SDN, and BC, along with an architecture for supporting availability, real-time
data bringing, scalability, security, resilience, and low latency. Using this archi-
tecture, they also evaluate throughput, response time, and accuracy in detecting
real-time attacks.

IoT networks is considered in [71], where authors present a model for facing
present IoT challenges with SDN and BC in the context of 5G networks. They
also introduce the Elliptic Curve Digital Signature algorithm for security pur-
poses which is evaluated in a simulation environment. The challenges for securing
cloud management from network perspective are investigated in [78], whose au-
thors take advantage of SDN and BC to perform secure cloud management.

16

A. Rahman et al.

An infrastructure incorporating both these technologies is developed to improve
the availability of cloud systems through the automatic provisioning of network
bandwidth. Derhab et al. [72] also face security challenges in an IoT-based in-
dustrial environment via a control framework leveraging BC-SDN integration.
Moreover, Open-Flow based ﬂow rules are installed in this industrial IoT net-
work eﬀectively exploiting the SDN paradigm. The presented SD-WAN model
admits two additional elements, namely: (i) an IDS which can defend against at-
tacks using the joint combination of Random Subspace Learning and K-Nearest
Neighbors methods (RSL-KNN ), and (ii) a BC-based integrity checking system.

Diﬀerently, Qiu et al. [79] deal with the consensus problem in BC for Soft-
ware Deﬁned Industrial IoT. To address such a problem, the authors use a Q-
learning approach showing also its eﬀectiveness via simulations. Shao et al. [80]
also present a consensus algorithm named Simpliﬁed Practical Byzantine Fault
Tolerance (SPBFT) to transmit messages in the SDN network securely. Specif-
ically, the authors apply this BC approach in an SDN environment to create
a readable, addable, and unmodiﬁable decentralized database. Also, to enhance
the security and reach consensus in the SDN control layer, they leverage the pro-
posed SPBFT algorithm to transfer messages between controllers. Finally, they
compare SPBFT with the Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance algorithm prov-
ing that the proposed algorithm can signiﬁcantly improve performance in terms
of security and eﬃciency. On the same line, Liu et al. [81] deﬁne the TrustBlock
method to calculate the trust value of SDN network node based on BC. More in
detail, the authors leverage SDN to assess the legitimacy of the nodes and BC to
ensure the trust value authenticity, immutability, and openness. The weight of
each evaluation attribute is determined using an entropy-based method. BC is
also considered as a solution to improve the SDN security of IoT-based applica-
tions interacting via inter-cloud communication in [82]. Basnet et al. [83] propose
Blockchain Security over SDN (BSS) to protect the privacy and availability of
resources against non-trusting members. The authors demonstrate that BSS fa-
cilitates ﬁles sharing among SDN users in distributed P2P basis using OpenStack
as a cloud storage platform. Additionally, Kataoka et al. [84], propose a Trust
List that represents the distribution of trust among IoT-related stakeholders
and aims to verifying and trusting IoT services and devices avoiding undesirable
traﬃc of IoT devices responsible for attacks on the network system. Firstly, they
verify that IoT traﬃc management is properly achieved using their proposal.
Then, they discuss and implement a proper combination of BC and SDN to en-
sure security, dependability, and trusting for IoT services and devices. Finally,
the proof of concept open-source implementation is tested on both public and
private BCs.

Steichen et al. [85] propose ChainGuard, which utilizes an SDN module to
manage network collisions and implements a ﬁrewall based on BC. Furthermore,
ChainGuard can oﬀer access control capabilities and can eﬀectively mitigate
ﬂooding attacks. Finally, the authors discuss other aspects of the proposed archi-
tecture and provide observations on their experiments with the aforementioned
model. Similarly, Houda et al. [86] present framework sharing SDN and BC to
mitigate DDoS attacks in a scalable, stable, and cost-eﬀective manner. Another
possible application is proposed in [87] whose authors introduce a consolidated
BC-SDN system that manages spectrum assets to enable interoperability be-
tween mobile network operators over small cells.

On the Integration of Blockchain and SDN

17

4 Security and Privacy Issues in BC-SDN Systems

This section covers security and privacy issues concerning BC and SDN tech-
nologies and their integration. Precisely, in Sec. 4.1, we discuss issues in BC, also
addressing those related to scalability and conﬁdentiality. Section 4.2 deals with
security management in SDN with particular focus on IDS. Section 4.3 describes
issues arising when integrating BC with SDN and also reports new challenges
faced in this context.

4.1 Security and Privacy Issues in Blockchain

As described in Sec. 2.1, BC is widely used in diﬀerent domains that take advan-
tage of its unique properties. Nevertheless, dangerous attacks can cause several
issues in BC-based networks. In the following, we describe some security issues
that attackers exploit to undermine the safety and cause damage in BC sys-
tems [88].

Majority Attacks (51% Attack). When BC uses PoW to reach consensus,
the probability of mining blocks depends on work done by miners. If a miner
holds 51% (i.e. more than half) of total computing power, it can monopolize
the mining process and take control over the BC to decide which block is val-
idated and then added to chain [88]. Based on this reasons, miners could join
together to mine more blocks, thus constituting a “mining pool”, that is a group
of nodes holding most of computing power. In such a situation, miners (orga-
nized in a mining pool) can modify the transaction data (potentially causing
double-spending attacks), alter their order, and stop the mining of other avail-
able blocks [89].

Forking Attacks. In a BC system, users can propose changes of BC protocol
or software. When this situation occurs, miners have to decide which version
to use and if there is not a unanimous decision, two BC versions are created.
Therefore, nodes can be divided into two types: old and new nodes.
Forks are categorized into two types: hard-fork and soft-fork.

– Hard fork: a hard-fork is a signiﬁcant change within a cryptocurrency pro-
tocol that is incompatible with the previous version. It usually changes or
improves an existing protocol or creates a new independent protocol (and
consequently a new chain). The node that does not update to the new ver-
sion will not be able to process transactions or push new blocks to the BC.
If a group of nodes continues to use the old version, a permanent split occurs
in the BC.

– Soft fork: a soft-fork is actually a change in a cryptocurrency protocol that
is back-compatible and where non-updated nodes are able to process trans-
actions and add new blocks to the BC.

With forking attacks, malicious users can replace the longest chain (also referred
to as the most trusted chain) on the current network with another chain to gain
personal beneﬁts. Therefore, reducing the generation of fork to the minimum
necessary is the most directly method to defend against forking attacks in a BC
system.

18

A. Rahman et al.

Fig. 7. Overview of conﬁdentiality and authentication process of a Blockchain.

Selﬁsh Mining. Selﬁsh mining constitutes another signiﬁcant concern for BCs.
During this attack, the malicious miner maintains the mined blocks without
broadcasting them towards the networking system and generates a personal
chain where he is the only one producing blocks that are revealed only after
particular requirements (chosen by the attacker) are fulﬁlled. In other words,
the attacker generates a secret longer chain that when revealed would have more
“chain-work” (viz. PoW) than the public shorter chain, and thus will be fol-
lowed by other miners cancelling the revenues obtained on the public chain in
the meantime. Therefore, in this case, reliable miners spend lots of time and
resources without obtaining any revenue, while selﬁsh miners continue to mine
their individual chains obtaining high revenue after revealing them [52].

Social Engineering. Social Engineering is an attack conducted by outsiders
using psychological tricks to get users’ personal information to access a com-
puter or even a whole network [90]. Social Engineering is a main issue aﬄicting
BC security: according to [91], in 2018 almost $3 billion was lost due to social
engineering. To perform this attack, phishing is one of the most used technique.
The attacker sends the targeted users a fake URL or website links on the behalf
of a company or organization brand he trusts. Commonly, they pretend that his
account has some security issues and ask the users to send their information
through provided links to solve such issues, claiming that otherwise his account
will be blocked. The ultimate aim of the attacker is to put pressure on the user
and hands over his information. Social engineering attacks are particularly tar-
get toward crypto users and realized via phishing among which SIM swapping
is one of the most utilized.

Privacy in Blockchain: Conﬁdentiality and Authentication. A BC is a
decentralized and distributed technology composed of a huge number of inter-
connected blocks which contain key information generated by diﬀerent parties
mainly for business purposes [92]. Researchers are attracted by the properties of
BC and have proposed it for IoT, Industry 4.0, and many other environments
to increase security and privacy.

As described, BC uses consensus mechanisms such as PoS and PoW being
independent of any third party: conﬁdentiality and secrecy of transactions are
guaranteed since they are not veriﬁed and owned by a single entity. Another
technique named Zero-Knowledge Proof transmits the information to an exam-
iner to identify whether the transaction is valid or not [93]. The goal of such a

On the Integration of Blockchain and SDN

19

technique is to hide the internals of a transaction revealing just its validity and
thus guaranteeing the full conﬁdentiality of the transaction details.

Moreover, to preserve the privacy (i.e. to further guarantee their conﬁdential-
ity), the transactions are secured via public-key cryptography, and once a block
of information is included in the chain, it cannot be altered or modiﬁed [94].
Public-key cryptography is also exploited for digital signature used for trans-
action authentication in an untrustworthy environment [31]. In detail, the BC
leverages public-key cryptography to send transactions and verify their authenti-
cation. The transaction is signed using the sender’s private key, before being sent
over the P2P network (see Fig. 7). To this aim, existing BC typically employs
the elliptic curve digital signature algorithm. As shown in Fig. 7, P2P networks
with the aid of global ledger give users the complete control on their data to en-
sure conﬁdentiality and authentication to diﬀerent applications, decreasing the
threat of third parties to sell, store, or manipulate personal information. Typ-
ical applications needing such privacy requirements are ﬁnancial transactions,
healthcare record, and legal documents (cf. Sec. 5).

Furthermore, BC is capable of providing privacy by storing data transactions
as blocks with hash values. The blocks are organized as a mesh like structure
and are encrypted and decrypted via public and private keys, respectively [95].
During this process users exploit the hash value of the public key as their address
and can also generate several addresses. This in turn keeps the real identity of a
user. In such a way, data conﬁdentiality is preserved, and each transaction can be
checked with the aid of the consensus process and the logs inside the BC. Indeed,
using this procedure, every transaction is rechecked until it is globally included:
it is ﬁrst signed by the recipient and then added with a digital signature. Overall,
all these procedures help to guarantee the integrity of data transferred within
the network and maintain the most sensitive data conﬁdential [96].

Authorization. When data reside in and are managed by a single organization,
dealing with security and privacy issues is relatively simple. Conversely, when the
information is exchanged between diﬀerent domains—as when leveraging BC—
securing data is a much more complex process. Secure access control mechanism
is a common approach used to ensure that only authorized entities can access
shared data. Such a mechanism involves access policies commonly consisting of
Access Control Lists (ACLs) associated with the data owner. An ACL is a list
of requestors who can access data, and provides related permissions (i.e. read,
write, update, delete) to speciﬁc data. Hence, the authorization is a function
of granting permission to authenticated users to access the protected resources
following predeﬁned access rules. Access rules mainly focus on who is performing
which action on what data object and for which purposes.

Commonly, traditional authorization approaches are deployed, managed, and
run by third parties (e.g., cloud service providers) that can be benign but curious.
To build a trustworthy system, the BC can be combined with an access control
mechanism, realizing a self-management of users’ own data, and thus keeping
shared data private. For instance, BC users can leverage SCs (cf. Sec. 5) to
deﬁne access permissions (i.e. authorize, refuse, revoke), operations (i.e. read,
write, update, delete), and duration of their data sharing without the loss of
control right. SCs can be triggered on the BC once all the preconditions are
met and can provide an audit mechanism for any request recorded in the ledger

20

A. Rahman et al.

Fig. 8. Block diagram of an IDS.

as well. A notable application of BC-based authorization leveraging SCs is for
securing healthcare data sharing [97].

Other Issues. Given the rising number of transactions, the BC volume grows on
a daily basis, and scalability issues have to be taken into account. Indeed, every
single node must save every transaction to verify all of them when needed. For
instance, Bitcoin—the most common crypto-currency using BC—has to process
≈ 7 transactions per second [98]. Given the small size of a block capacity, Bitcoin
can not handle or process the millions of transactions in real-time, and many
small transactions are delayed. Consequently, miners request high fees to process
and validate them.

Additionally, conﬁrmation time is another challenge to consider when operat-
ing with decentralized P2P transactions as in BCs. More speciﬁcally, each trans-
action takes an average time between 20 and 40 minutes for conﬁrmation [99].
Optimization strategies based on division of BC nodes, taking into account the
number of computers the user has to access the network, have been proposed to
reduce conﬁrmation time up to more than 70% [100].

4.2 Security Management in SDN

As shown in Sec. 2.2, SDN is a scalable networking paradigm consisting of three
planes: the application, control, and data plane. To secure SDN and lead to
adequate protection, the ﬁrst step is to understand the weaknesses of each of
them. Indeed, it is worth noticing that the security of the overall system can
be achieved by securing all the above-mentioned planes. However, because such
planes are separated [92], the protection of the whole system needs also to be
assured. In this sense, to secure the SDN model from attacks and intrusions,
an additional plane can be added: it comprises attack and intrusion detection
systems, and a ﬁrewall to defend the network and guarantee its availability [101].
Generally, in an SDN, users access data from various controllers, thus im-
plementing a new architecture where they ask permission from the controller

On the Integration of Blockchain and SDN

21

may protect the system from malware. On the other hand, networking devices
(e.g., switches, routers, storage systems, and sensors) are involved in packet for-
warding and located in the data plane. In addition, speciﬁc tools, such as Flow
Checker, VeriFlow, and FortNOX can be used to eﬀectively manage the packets
by systematically forwarding or deleting packets thus increasing network eﬃ-
ciency [58]. OpenFlow can assist devices in determining the exact match of the
packets [102]. While attack detection protects the network from the intruders,
data encryption handles users authentication and protects the data from being
manipulated by the attackers. In addition, the state of the network can be de-
termined by analyzing the information processed by the control plane. In the
last years, diﬀerent tools have been proposed to support network administrators
like Athena [103] that performs anomaly detection via a scalable approach.

As depicted in Fig. 5, in an SDN environment, there can be multiple con-
trollers (communicating via the eastbound/westbound API) or a single central-
ized controller. Data transmission is performed by the switches following a ﬂow
table that contains information about the connections and their properties [104].
These devices take speciﬁc decisions for each request coming from diﬀerent con-
nections. In this context, a malicious user can shake up the normal traﬃc ﬂows
in the network. For example, an intruder may send diﬀerent request for the
same service to damage the network or sends a message that corrupts network
devices. These are examples of common situations in which an IDS can help
to ensure security [105]. Figure 8 depicts the main components of an IDS with
the principal information exchanged among its blocks when applied in an SDN.
Based on the information exchanged with the controller(s), the IDS can guide
the update of the ﬂow table to avoid malicious threats conducted by an attacker.
To attain this goal, some researchers propose to check for the entropy of the IP
addresses to discover anomalies regarding the users, and then analyze the ﬂow
table to ﬁgure out some useful features to build Machine Learning models for
future predictions on unseen data [106,107].

4.3 Security and Privacy Issues of BC-SDN

The combination of BC and SDN helps to improve the eﬃciency of smart archi-
tectures such as: smart grid, education, healthcare, industry, transportation, etc.
Nevertheless, security continues to be a severe concern for these systems, and
eﬀorts are needed to solve challenges and issues as described in the following.

Aim and Challenges of BC-SDN for Security. The SDN-based system
separates the control plane from the data plane to provide more ﬂexibility to
the network. However, the control plane is the main target of the intruders who
can easily take control over it. Therefore, BC-SDN aims to improve the overall
security and ﬂexibility of the networking system [80]. BC is compatible with
both private and public environments and it can be useful for securing P2P
communications. For transferring ﬁle securely in IoT networks, BC provides
security, while SDN is also beneﬁcial for reducing energy consumption [108]. For
these reasons, we can identify many areas where there is a need to implement
the integration of SDN with BC.

However, several challenges concerning this combination still remain, and
the systems where the joint combination of the two techniques is applied have
to deal with some issues. Firstly, the planes of SDN networks can be accessible

22

A. Rahman et al.

from the intruders who can obtain information such as host IP or the networking
architecture performing simple scanning operations [109]. Leveraging these data
attackers can manipulate packets and launch several attacks such as ARP or
IP spooﬁng [110]. Moreover, if a host network is attacked then the intruder can
easily take control and manipulate the communication from the control plane
carrying out a hijacking attack [111]. A man in the middle attack instead aims
to take control over the SDN ﬂow tables and rewrite their content.

BC has been proposed as a viable way to protect the SDN environment
but actually it is not a silver bullet for all SDN security concerns and some chal-
lenges remain open. Among possible attacks, DDoS is one of the most dangerous
one [112] since it impairs the availability of the chain and can allow attackers
access to associated wallets and exchanges. Also, the presence of unauthorized
users might create security issues such as malicious access to wallet and refuse
to allow new blocks from entering the BC. Moreover, in the BC-based system,
transactions data are usually store on public chain so that anyone can easily get
access to the records. This would create important issues for environment where
transactions are meant to be secret (e.g., bank transactions). Time and cost are
another two challenges of integrating BC with SDN. Since smart systems need to
deal with several quick-access tasks, the lesser the time, the higher the eﬃciency.

Conﬁdentiality and Privacy in BC-SDN. Along with security, privacy is
a key concern also when considering the integration of BC with SDN. Indeed,
the combination of such technologies can signiﬁcantly help in reaching this goal.
As discussed in Sec. 4.1, BC stores information in the blocks after performing
cryptography and data hashing, thus privacy is guaranteed, and personal infor-
mation could remain conﬁdential. Since centralized systems can be aﬀected by
single point of failure [113], decentralized structure of BC comes up to reduce
this vulnerabilities [94]. In SDN, data privacy could be undermined by the col-
lection of the information since raw data are gathered from diﬀerent types of
device and processing procedures can corrupt data integrity. Considering a real
use case, the deployment of closed circuit television cameras for security pur-
poses is becoming extremely common in smart environments, and as a result,
people can barely attain a complete privacy because they feel monitored all the
time with consequent discomfort. BC could be applied for privacy protection so
that actual records are shown only to authorized users; otherwise the videos are
blurred by the system [114].

5 Notable Applications

This section describes applications developed thanks to facilities and properties
oﬀered by studied technologies. Section 5.1 provides the description of the most
important apps supported by BC technology; the last section discusses the ones
built by integrating SDN with BC (Sec. 5.2).

5.1 Blockchain Applications

BC technologies are used in many areas, not only in ﬁnancial applications. Fig-
ure 9 collects some of the application ﬁelds of BC technology covering several
industrial sectors. In the following, we describe some of the most common BC

On the Integration of Blockchain and SDN

23

Fig. 9. Blockchain applications.

applications. For the sake of completeness, other interesting ones are reported in
Tab. 3 where recent works are summarized along with their application ﬁelds and
related contributions. Unfortunately, almost all of such systems providing smart
services (and their actual applicability) are validated and evaluated in simulation
environments given the high cost needed to employ them in production.

Bitcoin and Cryptocurrencies. Bitcoin is a cryptocurrency, often described as
digital or virtual currency because when using it, there are no bank transactions
or any physical medium. Mining is a process originated from bitcoin systems
where miners verify transactions and can earn bitcoin when validating a partic-
ular number of transactions. Bitcoin is stored in wallets which are referred to as
a string of letters and numbers. These can be a piece of paper, a hardware device,
or online-based. A physical bitcoin is useless if it doesn’t have any private codes
inside. Starting in 2009, the cryptocurrency unit price was only 0.01$; nowa-
days 1 bitcoin is worth ≈ 40k$. Notably, the value of bitcoin has price ups and
downs when exchanged with traditional currency due to politics, media hype,
and country acknowledgements. Without being exhaustive, other than bitcoin,
the most important BC-based cryptocurrencies (based on their market cap) are
Ethereum, Litecoin, Tether, Binance Coin, and Cardano.

Supply Chain Management. We now discuss complex supply chains that extend
to all parts of the world [146]. All physical products should take a journey from
the seller to the buyer, and the process that allows to transfer such products is
referred to as supply chain. In this context, transparency is related to the infor-
mation accessible to ﬁrms composing the provider network [147]. The path to
the consumer is not straightforward and sometimes there are dozens of interme-
diaries involved. The BC technology can potentially improve the transparency
and traceability within the manufacturing supply chain through the use of the
immutable record of data, distributed storage, and controlled user access [146].

24

A. Rahman et al.

Table 3. State-of-the-art works focusing on the utilization of Blockchain in diﬀerent
application ﬁelds. The works are reported in chronological order.

Ref. Year Application Field

[115] 2021 Application of BC for the sustainability of Prefabricated Housing Construction.

[116] 2021 Barriers for adopting BC technology in sustainable supply chains.

[117] 2021 Constructing a smart city IoT framework with BC and SDN that is energy aware and distributed securely.

[118] 2021 Blockchain application for supply chain in the area of construction industry.

[119] 2021 Blokchain technology for the safety of the management of food data.

[120] 2021 Application of Blockchain for ﬁnancial sector.

[121] 2021 BC-based architecture for intelligent vaccine distribution approaches in COVID-19 pandemic situation.

[122] 2021 Integration of Blockchain for Supply chain management.

[123] 2021 Blockchain-based privacy for smart healthcare management.

[124] 2020 Impact of BC on applications covering diﬀerent industrial sectors.

[125] 2020 Eﬀects of BC technology on the logistics industry and other business models.

[126] 2020 Framework for the analysis of BC integrating institutional, market, and technical factors.

[127] 2020 BC-based decentralized app for smart building system management.

[128] 2020 Blockchained-based security for cloud storage management in IoT networks.

[129] 2019 Applications in the architecture, engineering, and construction industries.

[130] 2019 BC-enabled SCs in diﬀerent application scenarios (e.g., ﬁnance, energy, etc.).

[131] 2019 Review of the BC systems exploited in the oil and gas industry.

[132] 2019 Main trends of BC usage in supply chains management and logistics.

[133] 2019 SDN-IoT model with NFV implementation for smart cities based on a distributed protected BC architecture.

[134] 2019 Applications for smart communities (e.g., smart grid, transportation, healthcare).

[135] 2018 BC-connected gateways to maintain user privacy in IoT networks.

[136] 2018 LedgerGuard: a tool for ledger integrity, detecting and recovering corrupted blocks.

[137] 2018 Patient monitoring system using SC and private BC based on the Ethereum protocol.

[138] 2018 Potential applications of BC in travel industry.

[139] 2018 Decentralized apps and design of a certiﬁcate system based on Ethereum BC.

[140] 2018 Model for academic certiﬁcate veriﬁcation using BC technology.

[141] 2018 BC for Education to support protection and secure management of certiﬁcates.

[142] 2017 Lightweight instance of a BC system for smart home environments.

[143] 2017 Current and possible future applications of BC in various domains.

[144] 2017 FruitChains: a new protocol to ensure fairness in a BC.

[145] 2016 BC-based distributed system for educational record and reputation.

Healthcare. Nowadays, the use of IoT in medical care is rapidly increasing be-
cause of the impressive growth of medical data. Sharing such data is a critical
aspect for improving the quality of healthcare services and reducing medical
costs. The concept of protected healthcare information has been introduced to
handle secure and trusted data transactions for transmitting and storing med-
ical data. Indeed, though current healthcare systems bring much convenience,
many obstacles still exist in practice, that hinder secure and scalable data shar-
ing across multiple organizations, and thus limiting the development of medical
decision-making and research. Particularly, in a centralized system, there exist
risks related to the single-point of attack and data leakage. This may result in
unauthorized use of patients’ private data by curious organizations. In this case,
it is necessary to ensure security and privacy-protection and return the control
right of data back to users to encourage data sharing.

BC-based SCs are introduced to facilitate secure analysis and management
of medical sensors and to ensure data security and authorization (cf. Sec. 4.1)
for patients and medical professionals [97,137]. Figure 10 depicts a healthcare

On the Integration of Blockchain and SDN

25

Fig. 10. Exemplifying healthcare transaction using Blockchain.

transaction using the BC and the diﬀerent stakeholders involved, showing how
BC-based systems establish a secured connection between the doctor, patient,
and data analyst in healthcare organizations to manage the patient records se-
curely. In such a way, the BC can address a variety of problems (e.g., care
coordination, health data security, and interoperability issues) since—as shown
in Fig. 10—it can harness the data stream to improve the quality of care by
sharing medical records, protecting sensitive data from threat actors, and giving
patients more control over their information. The BC can aggregate a patient’s
medical and prescription records from multiple sites/providers to generate a sin-
gle, up-to-date aggregate record that medical professionals can comprehensively
refer to when treating patients.

E-voting. E-voting is an election voting system where users cast votes through
a digital system with a secure, reliable, and secret balloting over the Internet.
Many countries in the world use the e-voting system for its anonymity security,
reliability, integrity, and availability. The BC with the SCs emerges as a good
candidate to develop a cheaper, more secure, more transparent, and easier-to-use
e-voting system [148]. Using BC, the main focus is to make the voting process
fair and without any third-party mediation. There are many platforms to deal
with the e-voting systems; one of them, Ethereum, is a widespread network for
deploying such applications. The main concern in this scenario is to protect the
users’ identity and preserve transparency and integrity of data. To face this chal-
lenge Ethereum provides diﬀerent hash values to users in the network through
which it is almost impossible to identify the individuals. At the same time, each
transaction is visible to everyone in the network [149] and can be validated: this
makes it transparent to all the nodes in the network and maintains the integrity
of data. Moreover, in distributed databases, data are stored in particular loca-
tions, making the data unmodiﬁable and thus the vote can not be manipulated.

Smart Contract. An SC is a protocol that digitally facilitates the veriﬁcation,
control, or execution of an agreement. It is a compromise between two or more

26

A. Rahman et al.

Fig. 11. Integration of the Blockchain in an IoT environment.

parties in the form of a digital code. On the BC, participants run these codes
which are kept in a public database and are unchangeable. In other words, SCs
are a set of rules, and the BC manages the transactions that meet them so that
they can be delivered automatically without a third-party. With a contract, some
conditions needs to meet up; in this case, both rules and data are stored in the
BC. Moreover, if any illegal transaction according to the SC occurs, the BC
can swiftly rollback the transaction [66]. Summarizing, SC is acknowledged as
a contract having as features self-execution, transparency, ﬂexibility, and self-
enforcing [150].

Internet of Things. IoT presents a massive variety of devices oﬀering possibilities
for remote monitoring in numerous applications of several domains [151,152]. IoT
is widely used in smart industries, smart transportation, healthcare, military/battleﬁeld-
things, etc., and it is considered a revolution which is changing our world. Given
its impressive dimensions and distributed nature, privacy and security are the
main concerns [153,154]. Many frameworks are proposed to secure IoT environ-
ments; among them BC is increasingly used to make IoT platforms secure [155].
In BC-based IoT systems, as shown in Fig. 11, private BC performs tasks eﬃ-
ciently and at low cost in closed environments, whereas public BC can establish
connections between multiple IoT environments once at a time. In this case,
management of trust is crucial and is maintained centrally without any third-
party involvement.

Hyperledger. Hyperledger is an open-source collaborative eﬀort that has been
established to advance BC technologies. It is hosted by the Linux Foundation,
and it is an all-embracing co-operation platform that supports ledgers in supply
chains, banking, manufacturing, IoT, ﬁnance, and technology. In simple terms,
Hyperledger can be thought of as a software that enables developers all across
the globe to develop BC-based solutions for particular businesses [156].

On the Integration of Blockchain and SDN

27

Industry 4.0. Recently, industrial activities are advancing towards automation [2].
Activities that do not strictly require human intervention are performed with
the help of several automated technologies, and BC is one of the most impor-
tant. With its properties and the help of encrypted algorithms, nowadays it has
been applied (or proposed to apply) to diﬀerent industrial sectors [157,158]. For
instance, in the power electronics sector, through this technology, a producer
can submit an oﬀer for a certain device, while engineers evaluate and decide
whether to accept it. In case of no matching, the producer has the possibility
to resubmit the oﬀer to reduce the mismatch with the supply [159]. Flexibil-
ity, authorization mechanisms, and protection must be guaranteed when moving
to the automation process. BC allows a more sustainable and scalable ecosys-
tem for smooth industrial operations supporting other innovative technologies
such as edge computing [160]. Moreover, Industry 4.0 depends on data received
from multiple sources which are processed to produce an outcome. The entire
framework would fail if data are not properly validated. Also, ensuring their
protection is necessary so that a third-party can not compromise the data. In
this respect, BC can provide Industry 4.0 framework with unalterable, secure,
and privacy-preserving data storage [161].

Others Applications. Apart from the above-discussed applications, BC is also
used in ﬁnance, business, government, asset management, insurance, personal
identiﬁcation, real estate, and many other ﬁelds as summarized in Fig. 9.

5.2 BC-SDN Applications

The integration of BC and SDN can oﬀer various systems some remarkable
features. For example, in [87], the authors introduce a particular deployment
approach for multi-operator small cells exploiting the fusion of BC and SDN. In
detail, BC is implemented above the SDN platform that qualiﬁes the operations
within the network. These two technologies are also used in vehicular networks,
especially for security purposes because SDN provides ﬂexibility and BC oﬀers
trust to the network.

Generally, to diminish the vulnerability of the huge number of network de-
vices, SDN control plane is not satisfactory: this is why BC takes the place to
validate insertions into ﬂow tables [8]. Researchers propose to send the infor-
mation from network devices via BC agents which act as the mediator plane to
verify insertions and are enforced between the SDN switches and SDN controller.
This mechanism is responsible for vicious ﬂows.

The monocentric architecture of SDN exposes it to a great range of attacks;
for this reason, private BC is used to manage the resources along with the other
technologies [162]. In some particular contexts, SDN controllers are used to make
a chain of controllers as if each of them constitutes a block of the private BC.
Encryption is also used before storing the information and also to establish P2P
connections between SDN controllers and other devices [163].

A private BC is used in each domain of an SDN, while each SDN controller
is associated with other controllers through a public BC. In this way, security of
SDN is attained, while a signiﬁcant number of works aims to improve the per-
formance of cloud storage combined with BC-SDN. For instance, in [73] a dis-
tributed BC cloud architecture based on software-deﬁned fog nodes is presented.
In the fog layer, the SDN controllers realize a distributed network forming a BC,

28

A. Rahman et al.

while in the cloud layer, another BC is constituted with the cloud storage. When
multiple controllers are deployed in an SDN, BC can also harmonize their joint
cooperation.

There are many other examples where these two technologies are employed in
concert [164]. Indeed, although SDN has extremely valuable beneﬁts, it requires
BC support especially into the control plane to guarantee the security [80]. For
example, to mitigate DDoS attacks, in [165,68] is investigated the usage of SCs
in the Ethereum platform, whose rules are programmatically deﬁned in the SCs.

6 Challenges and Integration with Emerging Technologies

In this section, we ﬁrstly discuss limitations and challenges of BC-SDN inte-
gration, then we present some emerging technologies that can be used along
with the ones we have analyzed in this survey to oﬀer valuable facilities for new
applications.

Limitations and Challenges. Possible limitations of BC-SDN integration are
speciﬁcally related to the real-world implementations of solutions based on it. In
fact, most of the previous works have demonstrated its functioning and beneﬁts
in a simulated environment, without evaluating its actual feasibility. When as-
sessing real-world implementations, the scalability of the state-of-art solutions is
an open issue. For instance, if BC-SDN is exploited for managing and securing
a considerable number of nodes in an IoT scenario, it may incur severe perfor-
mance degradation or even failures. Also, the performance of an actual system
could be severely impacted by the speciﬁc BC implementation leveraged since
the most convenient platforms come at a huge cost in terms of implementa-
tion, processing, and energy: this is still an open challenge in both the research
community and industry (e.g., ﬁnance and technology sectors).

Another open challenge of SDN is related to synchronization. More speciﬁ-
cally, there is a lack of standardized methods to support synchronization in SDN.
Additionally, data conﬁdentiality in BC should be carefully managed by taking
into account the public visibility of BC among its users [33]. This could cause
distrust in governments and organizations in widely employing such technologies
when managing and sharing sensible data.

Blockchain for Big Data Analysis. Data science is becoming the heart of today’s
world. It is a fact that individuals and corporations with huge amount of data,
information, and knowledge extracted from them would have a great advantage
in modern business and government. The techniques to analyze and deal with
the high dimensional data are another key topic in modern research and are
commonly known as Big Data analysis. Since BC immutably stores records of
information through blocks, it will provide newer services and technologies for
such analyses. Indeed, data transactions will be more secure if BC can predict
some patterns about the upcoming records. Also, data would be accessible to
various interested actors participating in the chain without possible errors or
corruption.

Blockchain for Robotics. Robotics is another fundamental application ﬁeld strictly
related to Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI). AI-enabled robotics together with BC could
be exploited to implement bots that execute their operations communicating

On the Integration of Blockchain and SDN

29

with cloud/fog systems without interrupting their operability because of data
corruption or manipulation (due to attacks or not). Indeed, BC could prevent
illegal instructions from being injected into the robots, thus securing both au-
thentication and operability. The remote decision making process for robots
functioning based on BC would also decrease the complexity in terms of both
time and space.

Advanced Services via Holochain with AI-enabled BC. A main drawback of BC is
that it is characterized by a considerable computation complexity, and it needs
more memory with the increasing volume of transactions. Holochain is an al-
ternative technology that could replace BC to ensure privacy and security in
IoT networks, and has already gained the attention of researchers [166]. More
speciﬁcally, Holochain moves from the data-centric structure typical of BC to an
agent-centric one. Indeed, Holochain blocks are independent and each possesses
its “hashchain”, without the need of reaching the consensus for data valida-
tion. Such a distributed architecture can signiﬁcantly improve scalability via the
proper integration of micro-services and distributed application with always-
online devices (e.g., IoT sensors) [167]. If, on the one hand, Holochain can better
manage the scalability problem experimented by BC due to the increase of the
transactions volume, on the other hand, BC could be used in combination with
Holochain to oﬀer diﬀerent services that can take advantage from both tech-
nologies. For instance, Holochain can be used to develop diﬀerent distributed
BC solutions that can communicate to each other. Additionally, combining AI
into such a system can improve the security control in Holochain when needed.
Moreover, BC can continue to be exploited for transaction storing and authen-
tication in smaller networks.

Machine and Deep Learning with Blockchain. Commonly, BC adds a new block
of transactions to the chain after reaching the consensus (e.g., based on PoW)
and performing the authentication of every single transaction. Authentication
task can be automated using SCs that are blocks of predeﬁned instructions allow-
ing trusted transactions amongst the anonymous nodes without the presence of a
central legal authority. This process leveraging SCs could be replaced by Machine
Learning (ML) approaches that would exploit a dynamic trained model rather
than a ﬁxed set of predeﬁned rules. Deep Learning (DL) is slightly diﬀerent from
the traditional ML paradigm. Indeed, DL models are trained directly from input
data and can attain higher accuracy especially when working with unseen data
(e.g., via unsupervised or semi-supervised approaches) [168]. As seen in previous
sections, IoT sensors generate huge amount of new data in real-time, while BC
is successfully exploited for secure transactions. In these systems, DL models
can be deployed to perform automatic operations enhancing the performance
of ML approaches and eﬃciently providing several automated online services.
Overall, by using DL to manage the chain, security can be also signiﬁcantly
enhanced [169]. Moreover, since such models work better with large amount of
data, they can take advantage of the decentralized nature of BC fostering data
sharing.

7 Conclusion

In this survey, we have investigated two diﬀerent technologies which have found
extensive application in network-related scenarios, namely BC and SDN. Firstly,

30

A. Rahman et al.

we have provided a thorough overview of each technology discussing also their
main features, opportunities, and facilities they can provide to modern applica-
tions. Moreover, we have explored the innovative integration of these technologies—
named BC-SDN—proposed to face challenges of modern networking scenarios.
Indeed, BC-SDN allows security, reliability, ﬂexibility, cost-eﬀective management
to diﬀerent applications in various networking ﬁelds. In this regard, we have
reviewed and discussed state-of-art proposals providing both motivations and
details. Security and privacy issues are one of the most important factor driving
the integration of innovative technologies, thus they have been a key focus of our
discussion. We have then analyzed such issues related to considered technologies
and their integration. Actual applications of BC, SDN, and their integration
are further described to provide a real-world ﬂavor to our discussion, showing
that current “smart” application ﬁelds can not disregard the fruitful utilization
of such technologies. Finally, the integration with further present and emerging
technologies (e.g., Robotics, AI, Holochain) is also envisioned and discussed.

It is worth noticing that the integration of BC with SDN can help to shape
their social impact. The improved manageability, transparency, and security of
applications exploiting BC-SDN would rebuild the bridges between centralized
systems and application users thanks to its tracked, audited, and (if needed)
publicly accessible data. Indeed, such peculiar features oﬀer far-reaching possi-
bilities for social impact, such as transaction transparency, personal data pro-
tection, legitimacy, compliance, trust, etc. As discussed previously, the potential
use cases span from ﬁnancial transactions to e-voting and healthcare in which
(monetary/election/medical) data can be safely stored and are instantly avail-
able to stakeholders when needed, also in case of emergency. However, if, on the
one hand, there are a lot of opportunities and advantages, on the other hand,
it is hard to forecast if such a shift will happen. Indeed, this depends on how
organizations and governments will embrace such technologies: depending on its
deployment, a given technology can either be disruptive or transformative.

In view of the outcomes of the present survey, we think that the fruitful
trend of jointly using BC and SDN will continue and produce positive synergy.
Several domains and applications would beneﬁt from such an integration, and
both researchers and practitioners working in such domains should continue
exploring BC-SDN integration with the aim of providing advantages such as
management ﬂexibility, scalability and data ﬂow veriﬁcation. In fact, there is
room for further research eﬀort for the improvement of security and performance
of BC-SDN also in view of upcoming use cases and (sadly) possible threats.

Future avenues that should be investigated are the technical challenges un-
derlining the considered technologies when applied in scenarios having particular
constraints in terms of scalability and computational eﬃciency.

References

1. L. Mostarda, A. Navarra, and F. Nobili, “Fast ﬁle transfers from iot devices by

using multiple interfaces,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 1, p. 36, 2021.

2. G. Aceto, V. Persico, and A. Pescap´e, “Industry 4.0 and health: Internet of things,
big data, and cloud computing for healthcare 4.0,” Journal of Industrial Infor-
mation Integration, vol. 18, p. 100129, 2020.

3. S. Talari, M. Shaﬁe-Khah, P. Siano, V. Loia, A. Tommasetti, and J. P. Catal˜ao,
“A review of smart cities based on the internet of things concept,” Energies,
vol. 10, no. 4, p. 421, 2017.

On the Integration of Blockchain and SDN

31

4. C. Vandana, “Security improvement in iot based on software deﬁned networking
(sdn),” International Journal of Science, Engineering and Technology Research
(IJSETR), vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 2327–4662, 2016.

5. K. K. Karmakar, V. Varadharajan, S. Nepal, and U. Tupakula, “Sdn enabled

secure iot architecture,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2020.

6. D. Kreutz, F. M. Ramos, P. E. Verissimo, C. E. Rothenberg, S. Azodolmolky, and
S. Uhlig, “Software-deﬁned networking: A comprehensive survey,” Proceedings of
the IEEE, vol. 103, no. 1, pp. 14–76, 2014.

7. F. Al Shuhaimi, M. Jose, and A. V. Singh, “Software deﬁned network as solu-
tion to overcome security challenges in iot,” in 2016 5th International Conference
on Reliability, Infocom Technologies and Optimization (Trends and Future Direc-
tions)(ICRITO), pp. 491–496, IEEE, 2016.

8. J. Hu, M. Reed, M. Al-Naday, and N. Thomos, “Blockchain-aided ﬂow insertion
and veriﬁcation in software deﬁned networks,” in 2020 Global Internet of Things
Summit (GIoTS), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2020.

9. J. Hu, M. Reed, N. Thomos, M. F. AI-Naday, and K. Yang, “Securing sdn con-
trolled iot networks through edge-blockchain,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
2020.

10. L. Mendiboure, M. A. Chalouf, and F. Krief, “Towards a blockchain-based sd-iov
for applications authentication and trust management,” in International Confer-
ence on Internet of Vehicles, pp. 265–277, Springer, 2018.

11. O. Yurekten and M. Demirci, “Sdn-based cyber defense: A survey,” Future Gen-

eration Computer Systems, vol. 115, pp. 126–149, 2021.

12. S. Ahmad and A. H. Mir, “Scalability, consistency, reliability and security in sdn
controllers: A survey of diverse sdn controllers,” Journal of Network and Systems
Management, vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 1–59, 2021.

13. J. Hasneen and K. M. Sadique, “A survey on 5g architecture and security scopes in
sdn and nfv,” in Applied Information Processing Systems, pp. 447–460, Springer,
2022.

14. L. F. Eliyan and R. Di Pietro, “Dos and ddos attacks in software deﬁned net-
works: A survey of existing solutions and research challenges,” Future Generation
Computer Systems, vol. 122, pp. 149–171, 2021.

15. P. P. Ray and N. Kumar, “Sdn/nfv architectures for edge-cloud oriented iot: A
systematic review,” Computer Communications, vol. 169, pp. 129–153, 2021.
16. V. Balasubramanian, M. Aloqaily, and M. Reisslein, “An sdn architecture for time

sensitive industrial iot,” Computer Networks, vol. 186, p. 107739, 2021.

17. M. U. Younus, S. ul Islam, I. Ali, S. Khan, and M. K. Khan, “A survey on
software deﬁned networking enabled smart buildings: Architecture, challenges and
use cases,” Journal of Network and Computer Applications, vol. 137, pp. 62–77,
2019.

18. R. Sahay, W. Meng, and C. D. Jensen, “The application of software deﬁned
networking on securing computer networks: A survey,” Journal of Network and
Computer Applications, vol. 131, pp. 89–108, 2019.

19. I. Farris, T. Taleb, Y. Khettab, and J. Song, “A survey on emerging sdn and nfv
security mechanisms for iot systems,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutori-
als, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 812–837, 2018.

20. S. Wang, J. Wu, W. Yang, and L.-h. Guo, “Novel architectures and security
solutions of programmable software-deﬁned networking: a comprehensive survey,”
Frontiers of Information Technology & Electronic Engineering, vol. 19, no. 12,
pp. 1500–1521, 2018.

21. D. Berdik, S. Otoum, N. Schmidt, D. Porter, and Y. Jararweh, “A survey on
blockchain for information systems management and security,” Information Pro-
cessing & Management, vol. 58, no. 1, p. 102397, 2021.

22. M. N. M. Bhutta, A. A. Khwaja, A. Nadeem, H. F. Ahmad, M. K. Khan, M. A.
Hanif, H. Song, M. Alshamari, and Y. Cao, “A survey on blockchain technology:
Evolution, architecture and security,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 61048–61073, 2021.

32

A. Rahman et al.

23. T. M. Hewa, Y. Hu, M. Liyanage, S. Kanhare, and M. Ylianttila, “Survey on
blockchain based smart contracts: Technical aspects and future research,” IEEE
Access, 2021.

24. K. Yue, Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, Y. Li, L. Zhao, C. Rong, and L. Chen, “A survey
of decentralizing applications via blockchain: The 5g and beyond perspective,”
IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, pp. 1–1, 2021.

25. S. Latif, Z. Idrees, Z. e Huma, and J. Ahmad, “Blockchain technology for the in-
dustrial internet of things: A comprehensive survey on security challenges, archi-
tectures, applications, and future research directions,” Transactions on Emerging
Telecommunications Technologies, p. e4337, 2021.

26. L. Da Xu, Y. Lu, and L. Li, “Embedding blockchain technology into iot for secu-

rity: a survey,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2021.

27. S. AHMED, “Chapter three blockchain and industry 4.0 sabbir ahmed and razib

hayat khan,” Blockchain in Data Analytics, vol. 52, 2020.

28. X. Li, P. Jiang, T. Chen, X. Luo, and Q. Wen, “A survey on the security of
blockchain systems,” Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 107, pp. 841–
853, 2020.

29. J. Sengupta, S. Ruj, and S. D. Bit, “A comprehensive survey on attacks, security
issues and blockchain solutions for iot and iiot,” Journal of Network and Computer
Applications, vol. 149, p. 102481, 2020.

30. D. Dasgupta, J. M. Shrein, and K. D. Gupta, “A survey of blockchain from
security perspective,” Journal of Banking and Financial Technology, vol. 3, no. 1,
pp. 1–17, 2019.

31. Q. Feng, D. He, S. Zeadally, M. K. Khan, and N. Kumar, “A survey on privacy
protection in blockchain system,” Journal of Network and Computer Applications,
vol. 126, pp. 45–58, 2019.

32. W. Gao, W. G. Hatcher, and W. Yu, “A survey of blockchain: Techniques, ap-
plications, and challenges,” in 2018 27th international conference on computer
communication and networks (ICCCN), pp. 1–11, IEEE, 2018.

33. G.-T. Nguyen and K. Kim, “A survey about consensus algorithms used in
blockchain,” Journal of Information processing systems, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 101–
128, 2018.

34. T. Salman, M. Zolanvari, A. Erbad, R. Jain, and M. Samaka, “Security services
using blockchains: A state of the art survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys &
Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 858–880, 2018.

35. M. A. Ferrag, M. Derdour, M. Mukherjee, A. Derhab, L. Maglaras, and H. Jan-
icke, “Blockchain technologies for the internet of things: Research issues and chal-
lenges,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 2188–2204, 2018.
36. M. Banerjee, J. Lee, and K.-K. R. Choo, “A blockchain future for internet of
things security: a position paper,” Digital Communications and Networks, vol. 4,
no. 3, pp. 149–160, 2018.

37. A. A. Barakabitze, A. Ahmad, R. Mijumbi, and A. Hines, “5g network slicing
using sdn and nfv: A survey of taxonomy, architectures and future challenges,”
Computer Networks, vol. 167, p. 106984, 2020.

38. F. Bannour, S. Souihi, and A. Mellouk, “Distributed sdn control: Survey, taxon-
omy, and challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 20, no. 1,
pp. 333–354, 2017.

39. M. Iqbal, F. Iqbal, F. Mohsin, M. Rizwan, and F. Ahmad, “Security issues in soft-
ware deﬁned networking (sdn): Risks, challenges and potential solutions,” Inter-
national Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications, vol. 10, no. 10,
2019.

40. N. Bizanis and F. A. Kuipers, “Sdn and virtualization solutions for the internet

of things: A survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 4, pp. 5591–5606, 2016.

41. M. Karakus and A. Durresi, “A survey: Control plane scalability issues and ap-
proaches in software-deﬁned networking (sdn),” Computer Networks, vol. 112,
pp. 279–293, 2017.

On the Integration of Blockchain and SDN

33

42. W. Iqbal, H. Abbas, B. Rauf, Y. Abbas, F. Amjad, and A. Hemani, “Pcss: Privacy
preserving communication scheme for sdn enabled smart homes,” IEEE Sensors
Journal, 2021.

43. A. Rahman, C. Chakraborty, A. Anwar, M. Karim, M. Islam, D. Kundu, Z. Rah-
man, S. S. Band, et al., “Sdn–iot empowered intelligent framework for industry
4.0 applications during covid-19 pandemic,” Cluster Computing, pp. 1–18, 2021.
44. F. Tariq, M. Anwar, A. R. Janjua, M. H. Khan, A. U. Khan, and N. Javaid,
“Blockchain in wsns, vanets, iots and healthcare: A survey,” in Workshops of the
international conference on advanced information networking and applications,
pp. 267–279, Springer, 2020.

45. N. Deepa, Q.-V. Pham, D. C. Nguyen, S. Bhattacharya, T. R. Gadekallu,
P. K. R. Maddikunta, F. Fang, P. N. Pathirana, et al., “A survey on blockchain
for big data: Approaches, opportunities, and future directions,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2009.00858, 2020.

46. I. Yaqoob, K. Salah, R. Jayaraman, and Y. Al-Hammadi, “Blockchain for health-
care data management: opportunities, challenges, and future recommendations,”
Neural Computing and Applications, pp. 1–16, 2021.

47. H.-N. Dai, Z. Zheng, and Y. Zhang, “Blockchain for internet of things: A survey,”

IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 8076–8094, 2019.

48. S. Wadhwa, H. Babbar, and S. Rani, “A survey on emerging software-deﬁned
networking and blockchain in smart health care,” in IOP Conference Series: Ma-
terials Science and Engineering, vol. 1022, p. 012056, IOP Publishing, 2021.
49. H. A. Hassan, E. E. Hemdan, W. El-Shafai, M. Shokair, and F. E. Abd El-Samie,
“A survey on sdn-based intrusion detection systems on the internet of thing: Con-
cepts, issues, and blockchain applications,” Wireless Personal Communications
(preprint), 2021.

50. T. Alharbi, “Deployment of blockchain technology in software deﬁned networks:

A survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 9146–9156, 2020.

51. A. Rahman, M. J. Islam, Z. Rahman, M. M. Reza, A. Anwar, M. P. Mahmud,
M. K. Nasir, and R. M. Noor, “Distb-condo: Distributed blockchain-based iot-sdn
model for smart condominium,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 209594–209609, 2020.

52. A. P. Joshi, M. Han, and Y. Wang, “A survey on security and privacy issues of
blockchain technology,” Mathematical Foundations of Computing, vol. 1, no. 2,
pp. 121–147, 2018.

53. A. M. Antonopoulos, Mastering Bitcoin: Programming the open blockchain. ”

O’Reilly Media, Inc.”, 2017.

54. A. Gervais, G. O. Karame, K. W¨ust, V. Glykantzis, H. Ritzdorf, and S. Capkun,
“On the security and performance of proof of work blockchains,” in Proceedings
of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC conference on computer and communications security,
pp. 3–16, ACM, 2016.

55. S. T. Ali, V. Sivaraman, A. Radford, and S. Jha, “A survey of securing networks
using software deﬁned networking,” IEEE transactions on reliability, vol. 64, no. 3,
pp. 1086–1097, 2015.

56. P. Megyesi, A. Botta, G. Aceto, A. Pescap`e, and S. Moln´ar, “Challenges and so-
lution for measuring available bandwidth in software deﬁned networks,” Comput.
Commun., vol. 99, pp. 48–61, 2017.

57. S. Ali, M. K. Alvi, S. Faizullah, M. A. Khan, A. Alshanqiti, and I. Khan, “De-
tecting ddos attack on sdn due to vulnerabilities in openﬂow,” in 2019 Interna-
tional Conference on Advances in the Emerging Computing Technologies (AECT),
pp. 1–6, 2020.

58. A. Shaghaghi, M. A. Kaafar, R. Buyya, and S. Jha, “Software-deﬁned network
(sdn) data plane security: Issues, solutions, and future directions,” in Handbook
of Computer Networks and Cyber Security, pp. 341–387, Springer, 2020.

59. A. Abuarqoub, “A review of the control plane scalability approaches in software

deﬁned networking,” Future Internet, vol. 12, no. 3, p. 49, 2020.

34

A. Rahman et al.

60. L. Cui, F. R. Yu, and Q. Yan, “When big data meets software-deﬁned networking:
Sdn for big data and big data for sdn,” IEEE network, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 58–65,
2016.

61. A. Rahman, M. K. Nasir, Z. Rahman, A. Mosavi, S. Shahab, and B. Minaei-
Bidgoli, “Distblockbuilding: A distributed blockchain-based sdn-iot network for
smart building management,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 140008–140018, 2020.
62. S. W. Pritchard, G. P. Hancke, and A. M. Abu-Mahfouz, “Security in software-
deﬁned wireless sensor networks: Threats, challenges and potential solutions,”
in 2017 IEEE 15th International Conference on Industrial Informatics (INDIN),
pp. 168–173, IEEE, 2017.

63. A. Z. Ourad, B. Belgacem, and K. Salah, “Using blockchain for iot access con-
trol and authentication management,” in International Conference on Internet of
Things, pp. 150–164, Springer, 2018.

64. M. T. Hammi, B. Hammi, P. Bellot, and A. Serhrouchni, “Bubbles of trust: A
decentralized blockchain-based authentication system for iot,” Computers & Se-
curity, vol. 78, pp. 126–142, 2018.

65. C. Lin, D. He, X. Huang, K.-K. R. Choo, and A. V. Vasilakos, “Bsein: A
blockchain-based secure mutual authentication with ﬁne-grained access control
system for industry 4.0,” Journal of Network and Computer Applications, vol. 116,
pp. 42–52, 2018.

66. V. Gatteschi, F. Lamberti, C. Demartini, C. Pranteda, and V. Santamar´ıa,
“Blockchain and smart contracts for insurance: Is the technology mature
enough?,” Future Internet, vol. 10, no. 2, p. 20, 2018.

67. P. K. Sharma, S. Singh, Y.-S. Jeong, and J. H. Park, “Distblocknet: A distributed
blockchains-based secure sdn architecture for iot networks,” IEEE Communica-
tions Magazine, vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 78–85, 2017.

68. Z. A. El Houda, A. S. Haﬁd, and L. Khoukhi, “Cochain-sc: An intra-and inter-
domain ddos mitigation scheme based on blockchain using sdn and smart con-
tract,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 98893–98907, 2019.

69. A. Muthanna, A. A Ateya, A. Khakimov,

I. Gudkova, A. Abuarqoub,
K. Samouylov, and A. Koucheryavy, “Secure and reliable iot networks using fog
computing with software-deﬁned networking and blockchain,” Journal of Sensor
and Actuator Networks, vol. 8, no. 1, p. 15, 2019.

70. D. Zhang, F. R. Yu, and R. Yang, “Blockchain-based distributed software-deﬁned
vehicular networks: A dueling deep $${$q$}$ $-learning approach,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Cognitive Communications and Networking, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 1086–
1100, 2019.

71. J. Q. Navid Rajabi, “Sdiobot: A software-deﬁned internet of blockchains of things
model,” International Journal of Internet of Things, vol. 8, pp. 17–26, 2019.
72. A. Derhab, M. Guerroumi, A. Gumaei, L. Maglaras, M. A. Ferrag, M. Mukherjee,
and F. A. Khan, “Blockchain and random subspace learning-based ids for sdn-
enabled industrial iot security,” Sensors, vol. 19, no. 14, p. 3119, 2019.

73. P. K. Sharma, M.-Y. Chen, and J. H. Park, “A software deﬁned fog node based
distributed blockchain cloud architecture for iot,” Ieee Access, vol. 6, pp. 115–124,
2017.

74. L. Xie, Y. Ding, H. Yang, and X. Wang, “Blockchain-based secure and trustworthy
internet of things in sdn-enabled 5g-vanets,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 56656–
56666, 2019.

75. J. Gao, K. O.-B. O. Agyekum, E. B. Sifah, K. N. Acheampong, Q. Xia, X. Du,
M. Guizani, and H. Xia, “A blockchain-sdn-enabled internet of vehicles environ-
ment for fog computing and 5g networks,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 4278–4291, 2019.

76. R. Chaudhary, A. Jindal, G. S. Aujla, S. Aggarwal, N. Kumar, and K.-K. R.
Choo, “Best: Blockchain-based secure energy trading in sdn-enabled intelligent
transportation system,” Computers & Security, vol. 85, pp. 288–299, 2019.

On the Integration of Blockchain and SDN

35

77. L. Zhiyi, M. Shahidehpour, and L. Xuan, “Cyber-secure decentralized energy
management for iot-enabled active distribution networks,” Journal of Modern
Power Systems and Clean Energy, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 900–917, 2018.

78. P. Fernando and J. Wei, “Blockchain-powered software deﬁned network-enabled
networking infrastructure for cloud management,” in 2020 IEEE 17th Annual
Consumer Communications Networking Conference (CCNC), pp. 1–6, 2020.
79. C. Qiu, F. R. Yu, F. Xu, H. Yao, and C. Zhao, “Permissioned blockchain-based
distributed software-deﬁned industrial internet of things,” in 2018 IEEE Globecom
Workshops (GC Wkshps), pp. 1–7, IEEE, 2018.

80. Z. Shao, X. Zhu, A. M. Chikuvanyanga, and H. Zhu, “Blockchain-based sdn se-
curity guaranteeing algorithm and analysis model,” in International Conference
on Wireless and Satellite Systems, pp. 348–362, Springer, 2019.

81. Y. Liu, B. Zhao, X. Li, S. Wang, B. Zhang, and Z. Liu, “A trust chain assessment
method based on blockchain for sdn network nodes,” in 2019 IEEE International
Conference on Smart Internet of Things (SmartIoT), pp. 240–245, IEEE, 2019.
82. C. Tselios, I. Politis, and S. Kotsopoulos, “Enhancing sdn security for iot-related
deployments through blockchain,” in 2017 IEEE Conference on Network Function
Virtualization and Software Deﬁned Networks (NFV-SDN), pp. 303–308, IEEE,
2017.

83. S. R. Basnet and S. Shakya, “Bss: Blockchain security over software deﬁned net-
work,” in 2017 International Conference on Computing, Communication and Au-
tomation (ICCCA), pp. 720–725, IEEE, 2017.

84. K. Kataoka, S. Gangwar, and P. Podili, “Trust list: Internet-wide and distributed
iot traﬃc management using blockchain and sdn,” in 2018 IEEE 4th World Forum
on Internet of Things (WF-IoT), pp. 296–301, IEEE, 2018.

85. M. Steichen, S. Hommes, and R. State, “Chainguard—a ﬁrewall for blockchain
applications using sdn with openﬂow,” in 2017 Principles, Systems and Applica-
tions of IP Telecommunications (IPTComm), pp. 1–8, IEEE, 2017.

86. Z. Abou El Houda, A. Haﬁd, and L. Khoukhi, “Co-iot: A collaborative ddos
mitigation scheme in iot environment based on blockchain using sdn,” in 2019
IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2019.
87. A. A. Okon, I. Elgendi, O. S. Sholiyi, J. M. Elmirghani, A. Jamalipour, and
K. Munasinghe, “Blockchain and sdn architecture for spectrum management in
cellular networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 94415–94428, 2020.

88. H. Wang, Y. Wang, Z. Cao, Z. Li, and G. Xiong, “An overview of blockchain secu-
rity analysis,” in China Cyber Security Annual Conference, pp. 55–72, Springer,
2018.

89. I.-C. Lin and T.-C. Liao, “A survey of blockchain security issues and challenges.,”

IJ Network Security, vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 653–659, 2017.

90. T. R. Peltier, “Social engineering: Concepts and solutions,” Information Security

Journal, vol. 15, no. 5, p. 13, 2006.

91. LedgerOps.

https://ledgerops.com/blog/2019/03/28/

top-five-blockchain-security-\issues-in-2019/, 2019.

92. A. Rahman, M. J. Islam, A. Montieri, M. K. Nasir, M. M. Reza, S. S. Band,
A. Pescape, M. Hasan, M. Sookhak, and A. Mosavi, “Smartblock-sdn: An opti-
mized blockchain-sdn framework for resource management in iot,” IEEE Access,
vol. 9, pp. 28361–28376, 2021.

93. W. Li, H. Guo, M. Nejad, and C.-C. Shen, “Privacy-preserving traﬃc manage-
ment: A blockchain and zero-knowledge proof inspired approach,” IEEE Access,
vol. 8, pp. 181733–181743, 2020.

94. Y. Yu, Y. Li, J. Tian, and J. Liu, “Blockchain-based solutions to security and
privacy issues in the internet of things,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 25,
no. 6, pp. 12–18, 2018.

95. B. K. Mohanta, D. Jena, S. Ramasubbareddy, M. Daneshmand, and A. H. Gan-
domi, “Addressing security and privacy issues of iot using blockchain technology,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2020.

36

A. Rahman et al.

96. R. Zhang, R. Xue, and L. Liu, “Security and privacy on blockchain,” ACM Com-

puting Surveys (CSUR), vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 1–34, 2019.

97. S. Shi, D. He, L. Li, N. Kumar, M. K. Khan, and K.-K. R. Choo, “Applications
of blockchain in ensuring the security and privacy of electronic health record
systems: A survey,” Computers & security, vol. 97, p. 101966, 2020.

98. Z. Zheng, S. Xie, H. Dai, X. Chen, and H. Wang, “An overview of blockchain tech-
nology: Architecture, consensus, and future trends,” in 2017 IEEE International
Congress on Big Data (BigData Congress), pp. 557–564, IEEE, 2017.

99. A. Reyna, C. Mart´ın, J. Chen, E. Soler, and M. D´ıaz, “On blockchain and its
integration with iot. challenges and opportunities,” Future Generation Computer
Systems, vol. 88, pp. 173–190, 2018.

100. J. E. Pazmi˜no and C. Rodrigues, “Simply dividing a bitcoin network node may re-
duce transaction veriﬁcation time,” The SIJ Transactions on Computer Networks
& Communication Engineering (CNCE), vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 17–21, 2015.

101. K. Zkik, S. El Hajji, and G. Orhanou, “Design and implementation of a new
security planee for hybrid distributed sdns,” Journal of communications., vol. 14,
no. 1, pp. 26–32, 2019.

102. J. C. C. Chica, J. C. Imbachi, and J. F. Botero, “Security in sdn: A comprehensive
survey,” Journal of Network and Computer Applications, p. 102595, 2020.
103. S. Lee, J. Kim, S. Shin, P. Porras, and V. Yegneswaran, “Athena: A framework
for scalable anomaly detection in software-deﬁned networks,” in 2017 47th An-
nual IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks
(DSN), pp. 249–260, IEEE, 2017.

104. M. J. Islam, A. Rahman, S. Kabir, A. Khatun, A. Pritom, and M. Chowdhury,
“Sdot-nfv: A distributed sdn based security system with iot for smart city en-
vironments,” GUB Journal of Science and Engineering, vol. 7, pp. 27–35, Jul.
2021.

105. S. Shamshirband, M. Fathi, A. T. Chronopoulos, A. Montieri, F. Palumbo, and
A. Pescap`e, “Computational intelligence intrusion detection techniques in mobile
cloud computing environments: Review, taxonomy, and open research issues,”
Journal of Information Security and Applications, vol. 55, p. 102582, 2020.
106. L. Yang and H. Zhao, “Ddos attack identiﬁcation and defense using sdn based on
machine learning method,” in 2018 15th International Symposium on Pervasive
Systems, Algorithms and Networks (I-SPAN), pp. 174–178, IEEE, 2018.

107. S. Islam, U. Sara, A. Kawsar, A. Rahman, D. Kundu, D. D. Dipta, A. R. Karim,
and M. Hasan, “Sgbba: An eﬃcient method for prediction system in machine
learning using imbalance dataset,” International Journal of Advanced Computer
Science and Applications, vol. 12, no. 3, 2021.

108. H. A. Khattak, K. Tehreem, A. Almogren, Z. Ameer, I. U. Din, and M. Ad-
nan, “Dynamic pricing in industrial internet of things: Blockchain application for
energy management in smart cities,” Journal of Information Security and Appli-
cations, vol. 55, p. 102615, 2020.

109. M. Thangavel, V. Pavithra, and R. Guru Roja, “Network manipulation using
network scanning in sdn,” in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Security Challenges in
Emerging Networks, pp. 85–123, IGI Global, 2019.

110. A. V. Priya and H. K. Singh, “Mitigation of arp cache poisoning in software-
deﬁned networks,” in Advances in Smart System Technologies, pp. 85–94,
Springer, 2021.

111. J. D. Gadze, A. A. Bamfo-Asante, J. O. Agyemang, H. Nunoo-Mensah, and K. A.-
B. Opare, “An investigation into the application of deep learning in the detection
and mitigation of ddos attack on sdn controllers,” Technologies, vol. 9, no. 1,
p. 14, 2021.

112. A. Altarawneh, F. Sun, R. R. Brooks, O. Hambolu, L. Yu, and A. Skjellum,
“Availability analysis of a permissioned blockchain with a lightweight consensus
protocol,” Computers & Security, vol. 102, p. 102098, 2021.

On the Integration of Blockchain and SDN

37

113. G. Aceto, A. Botta, P. Marchetta, V. Persico, and A. Pescap`e, “A comprehensive
survey on internet outages,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 113, pp. 36–63, 2018.
114. A. Fitwi, Y. Chen, and S. Zhu, “A lightweight blockchain-based privacy protection
for smart surveillance at the edge,” in 2019 IEEE International Conference on
Blockchain (Blockchain), pp. 552–555, IEEE, 2019.

115. C. Z. Li, Z. Chen, F. Xue, X. T. Kong, B. Xiao, X. Lai, and Y. Zhao, “A
blockchain-and iot-based smart product-service system for the sustainability of
prefabricated housing construction,” Journal of Cleaner Production, vol. 286,
p. 125391, 2021.

116. M. Kouhizadeh, S. Saberi, and J. Sarkis, “Blockchain technology and the sus-
tainable supply chain: Theoretically exploring adoption barriers,” International
Journal of Production Economics, vol. 231, p. 107831, 2021.

117. M. J. Islam, A. Rahman, S. Kabir, M. R. Karim, U. K. Acharjee, M. K. Nasir,
S. S. Band, M. Sookhak, and S. Wu, “Blockchain-sdn-based energy-aware and
distributed secure architecture for iot in smart cities,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 3850–3864, 2022.

118. H. Hamledari and M. Fischer, “The application of blockchain-based crypto assets
for integrating the physical and ﬁnancial supply chains in the construction &
engineering industry,” Automation in construction, vol. 127, p. 103711, 2021.
119. W. Hong, J. Mao, L. Wu, and X. Pu, “Public cognition of the application of
blockchain in food safety management—data from china’s zhihu platform,” Jour-
nal of Cleaner Production, vol. 303, p. 127044, 2021.

120. L. Mishra and V. Kaushik, “Application of blockchain in dealing with sustain-
ability issues and challenges of ﬁnancial sector,” Journal of Sustainable Finance
& Investment, pp. 1–16, 2021.

121. A. Rahman, M. J. Islam, M. R. Karim, D. Kundu, and S. Kabir, “An intelli-
gent vaccine distribution process in covid-19 pandemic through blockchain-sdn
framework from bangladesh perspective,” in 2021 International Conference on
Electronics, Communications and Information Technology (ICECIT), pp. 1–4,
2021.

122. M. R. Kabir, M. A. Islam, Marniati, and Herawati, “Application of blockchain
for supply chain ﬁnancing: Explaining the drivers using sem,” Journal of Open
Innovation: Technology, Market, and Complexity, vol. 7, no. 3, p. 167, 2021.
123. M. J. Hossain, M. A. H. Wadud, A. Rahman, J. Ferdous, M. S. Alam, T. M. Amir
Ul Haque Bhuiyan, and M. F. Mridha, “A secured patient’s online data monitoring
through blockchain: An intelligent way to store lifetime medical records,” in 2021
International Conference on Science Contemporary Technologies (ICSCT), pp. 1–
6, 2021.

124. X. Pan, X. Pan, M. Song, B. Ai, and Y. Ming, “Blockchain technology and en-
terprise operational capabilities: An empirical test,” International Journal of In-
formation Management, vol. 52, p. 101946, 2020.

125. S. T¨onnissen and F. Teuteberg, “Analysing the impact of blockchain-technology
for operations and supply chain management: An explanatory model drawn from
multiple case studies,” International Journal of Information Management, vol. 52,
p. 101953, 2020.

126. M. Janssen, V. Weerakkody, E. Ismagilova, U. Sivarajah, and Z. Irani, “A frame-
work for analysing blockchain technology adoption: Integrating institutional, mar-
ket and technical factors,” International Journal of Information Management,
vol. 50, pp. 302–309, 2020.

127. Q. Xu, Z. He, Z. Li, M. Xiao, R. S. M. Goh, and Y. Li, “An eﬀective blockchain-
based, decentralized application for smart building system management,” in Real-
Time Data Analytics for Large Scale Sensor Data, pp. 157–181, Elsevier, 2020.

128. A. Rahman, M. J. Islam, M. Saikat Islam Khan, S. Kabir, A. I. Pritom, and
M. Razaul Karim, “Block-sdotcloud: Enhancing security of cloud storage through
blockchain-based sdn in iot network,” in 2020 2nd International Conference on
Sustainable Technologies for Industry 4.0 (STI), pp. 1–6, 2020.

38

A. Rahman et al.

129. N. O. Nawari and S. Ravindran, “Blockchain and building information modeling
(bim): Review and applications in post-disaster recovery,” Buildings, vol. 9, no. 6,
p. 149, 2019.

130. S. Wang, L. Ouyang, Y. Yuan, X. Ni, X. Han, and F.-Y. Wang, “Blockchain-
enabled smart contracts: architecture, applications, and future trends,” IEEE
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, vol. 49, no. 11,
pp. 2266–2277, 2019.

131. H. Lu, K. Huang, M. Azimi, and L. Guo, “Blockchain technology in the oil and
gas industry: A review of applications, opportunities, challenges, and risks,” Ieee
Access, vol. 7, pp. 41426–41444, 2019.

132. E. Tijan, S. Aksentijevi´c, K. Ivani´c, and M. Jardas, “Blockchain technology im-

plementation in logistics,” Sustainability, vol. 11, no. 4, p. 1185, 2019.

133. A. Rahman, M. J. Islam, F. A. Sunny, and M. K. Nasir, “Distblocksdn: A dis-
tributed secure blockchain based sdn-iot architecture with nfv implementation for
smart cities,” in 2019 2nd International Conference on Innovation in Engineering
and Technology (ICIET), pp. 1–6, 2019.

134. S. Aggarwal, R. Chaudhary, G. S. Aujla, N. Kumar, K.-K. R. Choo, and A. Y.
Zomaya, “Blockchain for smart communities: Applications, challenges and oppor-
tunities,” Journal of Network and Computer Applications, 2019.

135. S.-C. Cha, J.-F. Chen, C. Su, and K.-H. Yeh, “A blockchain connected gateway for
ble-based devices in the internet of things,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 24639–24649,
2018.

136. Q. Zhang, P. Novotny, S. Baset, D. Dillenberger, A. Barger, and Y. Manevich,
“Ledgerguard: Improving blockchain ledger dependability,” in International Con-
ference on Blockchain, pp. 251–258, Springer, 2018.

137. K. N. Griggs, O. Ossipova, C. P. Kohlios, A. N. Baccarini, E. A. Howson, and
T. Hayajneh, “Healthcare blockchain system using smart contracts for secure
automated remote patient monitoring,” Journal of medical systems, vol. 42, no. 7,
p. 130, 2018.

138. V. Swati and A. S. Prasad, “Application of blockchain technology in travel in-
dustry,” in 2018 International Conference on Circuits and Systems in Digital
Enterprise Technology (ICCSDET), pp. 1–5, IEEE, 2018.

139. J.-C. Cheng, N.-Y. Lee, C. Chi, and Y.-H. Chen, “Blockchain and smart contract
for digital certiﬁcate,” in 2018 IEEE international conference on applied system
invention (ICASI), pp. 1046–1051, IEEE, 2018.

140. O. Ghazali and O. S. Saleh, “A graduation certiﬁcate veriﬁcation model via uti-
lization of the blockchain technology,” Journal of Telecommunication, Electronic
and Computer Engineering (JTEC), vol. 10, no. 3-2, pp. 29–34, 2018.

141. W. Gr¨ather, S. Kolvenbach, R. Ruland, J. Sch¨utte, C. Torres, and F. Wend-
land, “Blockchain for education: lifelong learning passport,” in Proceedings of
1st ERCIM Blockchain Workshop 2018, European Society for Socially Embedded
Technologies (EUSSET), 2018.

142. A. Dorri, S. S. Kanhere, and R. Jurdak, “Towards an optimized blockchain for
iot,” in 2017 IEEE/ACM Second International Conference on Internet-of-Things
Design and Implementation (IoTDI), pp. 173–178, IEEE, 2017.

143. S. T. Aras and V. Kulkarni, “Blockchain and its applications–a detailed survey,”
International Journal of Computer Applications, vol. 180, no. 3, pp. 29–35, 2017.
144. R. Pass and E. Shi, “Fruitchains: A fair blockchain,” in Proceedings of the ACM

Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, pp. 315–324, 2017.

145. M. Sharples and J. Domingue, “The blockchain and kudos: A distributed sys-
tem for educational record, reputation and reward,” in European conference on
technology enhanced learning, pp. 490–496, Springer, 2016.

146. S. A. Abeyratne and R. P. Monfared, “Blockchain ready manufacturing supply
chain using distributed ledger,” International Journal of Research in Engineering
and Technology, vol. 5, no. 9, pp. 1–10, 2016.

On the Integration of Blockchain and SDN

39

147. K. Francisco and D. Swanson, “The supply chain has no clothes: Technology
adoption of blockchain for supply chain transparency,” Logistics, vol. 2, no. 1,
p. 2, 2018.

148. E. Yavuz, A. K. Koc, U. C. C¸ abuk, and G. Dalkılı¸c, “Towards secure e-voting using
ethereum blockchain,” in 2018 6th International Symposium on Digital Forensic
and Security (ISDFS), pp. 1–7, IEEE, 2018.

149. S. Pareek, A. Upadhyay, S. Doulani, S. Tyagi, and A. Varma, “E-voting using

ethereum blockchain,” IJRTI, vol. 3, pp. 2456–3315, 2018.

150. Z. Wang, H. Jin, W. Dai, K.-K. R. Choo, and D. Zou, “Ethereum smart con-
tract security research: survey and future research opportunities,” Frontiers of
Computer Science, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 1–18, 2021.

151. S. Sankaran, S. Sanju, and K. Achuthan, “Towards realistic energy proﬁling of
blockchains for securing internet of things,” in 2018 IEEE 38th International
Conference on Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS), pp. 1454–1459, IEEE,
2018.

152. A. Rahman, M. Rahman, D. Kundu, M. R. Karim, S. S. Band, and M. Sookhak,
“Study on iot for sars-cov-2 with healthcare: present and future perspective,”
Mathematical Biosciences and Engineering, vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 9697–9726, 2021.

153. G. Bovenzi, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, V. Persico, and A. Pescap`e, “A hierarchical
hybrid intrusion detection approach in iot scenarios,” in IEEE Global Communi-
cations Conference, GLOBECOM 2020, Virtual Event, Taiwan, December 7-11,
2020, pp. 1–7, IEEE, 2020.

154. A. Nascita, F. Cerasuolo, D. Di Monda, J. Garcia, A. Montieri, and A. Pescap`e,
“Machine and deep learning approaches for IoT attack classiﬁcation,” in IEEE
INFOCOM Workshops’22, 05 2022.

155. A. Dorri, S. S. Kanhere, R. Jurdak, and P. Gauravaram, “Blockchain for iot
security and privacy: The case study of a smart home,” 2017 IEEE International
Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications Workshops (PerCom
Workshops), pp. 618–623, 2017.

156. M. Hasan, A. Rahman, and M. J. Islam, “Distb-cvs: A distributed secure
blockchain based online certiﬁcate veriﬁcation system from bangladesh perspec-
tive,” in 2020 2nd International Conference on Advanced Information and Com-
munication Technology (ICAICT), pp. 460–465, 2020.

157. A. Rahman, U. Sara, D. Kundu, S. Islam, M. J. Islam, M. Hasan, Z. Rahman,
and M. K. Nasir, “Distb-sdoindustry: Enhancing security in industry 4.0 services
based on distributed blockchain through software deﬁned networking-iot enabled
architecture,” International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applica-
tions, vol. 11, no. 9, 2020.

158. Y. Zuo, “Making smart manufacturing smarter–a survey on blockchain technology

in industry 4.0,” Enterprise Information Systems, pp. 1–31, 2020.

159. Y. Yan, B. Duan, Y. Zhong, and X. Qu, “Blockchain technology in the internet
plus: The collaborative development of power electronic devices,” in IECON 2017-
43rd Annual Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics Society, pp. 922–927,
IEEE, 2017.

160. I. Sitt´on-Candanedo, “A new approach: Edge computing and blockchain for in-
dustry 4.0,” in International Symposium on Distributed Computing and Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, pp. 201–204, Springer, 2019.

161. T. M. Fern´andez-Caram´es, O. Blanco-Novoa, I. Froiz-M´ıguez, and P. Fraga-
Lamas, “Towards an autonomous industry 4.0 warehouse: A uav and blockchain-
based system for inventory and traceability applications in big data-driven supply
chain management,” Sensors, vol. 19, no. 10, p. 2394, 2019.

162. S. Misra, P. K. Deb, N. Pathak, and A. Mukherjee, “Blockchain-enabled sdn
for securing fog-based resource-constrained iot,” in IEEE INFOCOM 2020-IEEE
Conference on Computer Communications Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS),
pp. 490–495, IEEE, 2020.

40

A. Rahman et al.

163. A. Yazdinejad, R. M. Parizi, A. Dehghantanha, Q. Zhang, and K.-K. R. Choo,
“An energy-eﬃcient sdn controller architecture for iot networks with blockchain-
based security,” IEEE Transactions on Services Computing, 2020.

164. C. Qiu, F. R. Yu, H. Yao, C. Jiang, F. Xu, and C. Zhao, “Blockchain-based
software-deﬁned industrial internet of things: A dueling deep q - learning ap-
proach,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 4627–4639, 2018.

165. K. M. Shayshab Azad, N. Hossain, M. J. Islam, A. Rahman, and S. Kabir, “Pre-
ventive determination and avoidance of ddos attack with sdn over the iot net-
works,” in 2021 International Conference on Automation, Control and Mecha-
tronics for Industry 4.0 (ACMI), pp. 1–6, 2021.

166. S. Zaman, M. R. Khandaker, R. T. Khan, F. Tariq, and K.-K. Wong, “Thinking
out of the blocks: Holochain for distributed security in iot healthcare,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2103.01322, 2021.

167. K. Janjua, M. A. Shah, A. Almogren, H. A. Khattak, C. Maple, and I. U. Din,
“Proactive forensics in iot: privacy-aware log-preservation architecture in fog-
enabled-cloud using holochain and containerization technologies,” Electronics,
vol. 9, no. 7, p. 1172, 2020.

168. G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescap´e, “Mobile encrypted traﬃc
classiﬁcation using deep learning: Experimental evaluation, lessons learned, and
challenges,” IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management, vol. 16,
no. 2, pp. 445–458, 2019.

169. G. Bovenzi, F. Cerasuolo, A. Montieri, A. Nascita, V. Persico, and A. Pescap´e, “A
comparison of machine and deep learning models for detection and classiﬁcation
of android malware traﬃc,” IEEE DistInSys’22, 2022.

On the Integration of Blockchain and SDN

41

Authors’ Biography

Anichur Rahman received the B.Sc. and M.Sc degree in Computer Science
and Engineering from Mawlana Bhashani Science and Technology University,
Bangladesh in 2017 and 2020 respectively. Currently, he is working as a Lecturer
at Computer Science and Engineering National Institute of Textile Engineering
and Research, Bangladesh. His research interests include the Internet of Things,
Blockchain, Software Deﬁned Networking, Machine Learning, 5G, Industry 4.0,
and Data Science.

Antonio Montieri is an Assistant Professor at DIETI of the University of
Napoli Federico II. He has received his Ph.D. degree in Information Technology
and Electrical Engineering in April 2020 from the same University. His work con-
cerns network measurements, (encrypted and mobile) traﬃc classiﬁcation, traﬃc
modeling and prediction, and monitoring of cloud network performance. Antonio
has co-authored 35 papers in international journals and conference proceedings.

Dipanjali Kundu received the B.Sc. degree in Computer Science and Engi-
neering from Chittagong University of Engineering and Technology, Bangladesh
in 2018. Currently, she is working as a Lecturer at Computer Science and En-
gineering, National Institute of Textile Engineering and Research, Bangladesh.
Her research interests include Machine Learning, Human Computer Interaction,
Internet of Things, Blockchain, Software Deﬁned Networking, 5G, Industry 4.0,
and Robotics.

Md. Razaul Karim received the B.Sc. degree in Computer Science and En-
gineering from Mawlana Bhashani Science and Technology University, Tangail,
Bangladesh in 2020. The main interests of his research are Machine Learning,
Computer Vision, and Image Processing. He is also keen on Blockchain.

Md. Jahidul Islam received the B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in Computer Science
and Engineering from Jagannath University, Dhaka, in 2015 and 2017 respec-
tively. Currently, he is working as a Lecturer and Program Coordinator at Com-
puter Science and Engineering, Green University of Bangladesh. His research
interests include Internet of Things, Blockchain, Network Function Virtualiza-
tion, Software Deﬁned Networking, 5G, Industry 4.0, Machine Learning, and
Wireless Mesh Networking.

Umme Sara received her B.Sc. in 2012 and M.Sc. in 2014 both from the Ja-
hangirnager University under the discipline of Computer Science and Engineer-
ing. Currently, she is working as an Assistant Professor and Head at the De-
partment of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of Textile
Engineering and Research, Bangladesh. Her current research interests include
Machine Learning, Digital Image Processing, Computer Vision Systems, Data
Science, IoT, and Blockchain.

Alfredo Nascita is a PhD Student in Information Technology and Electrical
Engineering at DIETI, University of Napoli Federico II. He received his M.S. Lau-
rea Degree in Computer Engineering from the same University in March 2021.

42

A. Rahman et al.

His research interests include traﬃc classiﬁcation, machine and deep learning,
and explainable artiﬁcial intelligence.

Antonio Pescap´e is a Full Professor of computer engineering at the University
of Napoli Federico II. His work focuses on measurement, monitoring, and analysis
of the Internet. He has co-authored more than 200 conference and journal papers,
he is the recipient of a number of research awards. Also, he has served as an
independent reviewer/evaluator of research projects/project proposals co-funded
by a number of governments and agencies.

