A Survey on the Perception of Innovation in a Large
Product-focused Software Organization

Johan Lin˚aker, Husan Munir, Per Runeson, Bj¨orn Regnell, and
Claes Schrewelius

Software Engineering Research Group, Computer Science, Lund University
[johan.linaker,hussan.munir,per.runeson,bjorn.regnell]@cs.lth.se

Abstract. Context. Innovation is promoted in companies to help them stay com-
petitive. Four types of innovation are deﬁned: product, process, business, and
organizational. Objective. We want to understand the perception of the innova-
tion concept in industry, and particularly how the innovation types relate to each
other. Method. We launched a survey at a branch of a multi-national corpora-
tion. Results. From a qualitative analysis of the 229 responses, we see that the
understanding of the innovation concept is somewhat narrow, and mostly related
to product innovation. A majority of respondents indicate that product innovation
triggers process, business, and organizational innovation, rather than vice versa.
However, there is a complex interdependency between the types. We also iden-
tify challenges related to each of the types. Conclusion. Increasing awareness and
knowledge of different types of innovation, may improve the innovation. Further,
they cannot be handled one by one, but in their interdependent relations.

Keywords: product innovation, process innovation, business innovation, organizational
innovation, software engineering, software business, survey, case study, empirical in-
vestigation

1

Introduction

In recent years, the focus on innovation has increased in many lines of business. Novel
products and services have always been important, while with an increasing pace of
change, new technologies and market concepts being launched, with small vendors
coming up and changing the scene in very short time, the need for continuous inno-
vation is stressed in larger companies. Internet technologies for communication and
distribution, and products and services primarily differentiated with respect to software,
enables this shift by lowering the thresholds for new actors, and thereby threatening the
position of existing ones.

Innovation is not only bringing new products to the market. The Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) Oslo manual [1], which is used to
guide national statistics collection on innovation, distinguishes between four categories
of innovation, i) product, ii) process, iii) marketing, and iv) organizational. These cat-
egories are deﬁned as follows: A product innovation is the introduction of a good or
service that is new or signiﬁcantly improved with respect to its characteristics or in-
tended uses [1, §156], while a process innovation is the implementation of a new or

2
2
0
2

l
u
J

1
3

]
E
S
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
0
0
2
0
.
8
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

Johan Lin˚aker et al.

signiﬁcantly improved production or delivery method [1, §163]. In the context of soft-
ware engineering, we also count software development processes and practices as “pro-
duction” methods in the process innovation category. A marketing innovation is the
implementation of a new marketing method involving signiﬁcant changes in product
design or packaging, product placement, product promotion or pricing [1, §169]. Note
that this involves the whole concept of bringing a product or service to the market,
a kind of innovation we have seen in the software and internet domain, for example,
using information or advertising instead of money as a trade for services. Finally, an
organisational innovation is the implementation of a new organisational method in the
ﬁrm’s business practices, workplace organisation or external relations [1, §177]. This
is also prevalent in software, where for example open source software, outsourcing and
offshoring signiﬁcantly has changed the game in many lines of business.

Given these categories of innovation, we were interested in studying to what extent
these were known and integrated in the culture of a large company, which is under
rapid change, and where innovation is a key survival factor, due to the volatility of the
market. In particular, we wanted to study the awareness of the innovation concepts,
and the interplay between the four types of innovation; which types precedes the other?
There is a similarity to the software process improvement trinity of people, process and
technology, much discussed in the 1990’s [?]. More speciﬁcally, this study formulates
three research question:

RQ1 What are the general perceptions of the term innovation?
RQ2 What relations are assumed between product innovation and process, organiza-

tional and marketing innovation, respectively?

RQ3 Which challenges exist with respect to the four types of innovation?

To address the research questions we launched an internal online survey [11] in a
local branch of a multi-national corporation. The target population consisted of approx-
imately 900 employees. On a global level the company employs approximately 5,000.
We found that the understanding of the innovation concept is somewhat narrow, and
mostly related to product innovation. A majority of respondents indicate that product
innovation triggers process, business, and organizational innovation, rather than vice
versa. However, there is a complex interdependency between the types.

The paper is outlined as follows. In Section 2 we summarize empirical studies
on people’s attitudes to innovation in software engineering. Section 3 describes the
methodology and design of the survey, as well as threats to validity and a characteri-
zation of the case company. In Section 4, we report our ﬁndings from the survey, and
analyze the data. Section 5 concludes the paper.

2 Related work

Innovation related to information technology (IT) has become vital part of most or-
ganizations’ success, primarily for two reasons: i) growing importance of innovation
for organizational life, and ii) the introduction of IT into almost every business unit of
organizations [10]. Lee and Xia [20] addressed the process bottlenecks to innovation,
where development teams are inefﬁcient and reactive in most cases. Consequently, this

A Survey on the Perception of Innovation in a Large Software Organization

3

causes problems with lack of support for business adaptions to shifting demands. Ag-
ile development seem to offer remedy to make the whole process more innovative for
product development and help development teams to quickly deliver innovative, high
quality solutions to an ever increasing demand of business innovation [14].

On the other hand, research evidence [7] also suggest that agile could also be a
hindrance for product innovation. It creates barrier in transferring the ideas outside the
team boundaries due to short iterations and feature backlog reduced the amount of time
that teams could spent trying new things or sharing new ideas across different teams.
Wnuk et al. [29] also hinted the fact that existing requirements processes are designed
to handle mature features and consequently, raises the question of process innovation
by having a separate requirements engineering process to make room for innovative
features (other than featured backlog) in the products.

Lund at al. [22] conducted a survey to explore the effects that reutilization have on
innovation. Results revealed that standardization of process will free up time for inno-
vation and most interestingly, routines are capable of having positive impact on occur-
rence of ideas and follow through on ideas. Furthermore, paring routines with openness
to continuously improve the existing routines leverage positive effects on innovation.
Therefore, take away from the study for managers is to take a look at existing routines
with the spectacle of improving them, which will not only improve the efﬁciency but
also the innovation aspect.

Moreover, another study was found where Harrison et al. [12] conducted a survey
with 170 Finnish software organizations to explore the impact of human capital on
open innovation. Therefore, it can be used as an example where people are affecting
the innovation activities in the organization. The study ﬁndings suggest that software
companies with the larger academically educated staff are more likely to apply open
innovation business strategies to accelerate their internal innovation process. The study
further argued that this could be due the strong ties between communities and universi-
ties. Similarly, Nirjar [24] also performed a survey with 121 software companies across
India to explore the impact of workforce commitment on the innovation capability of
the software enterprises. The study ﬁndings highlighted that the commitment of the
managers of software ﬁrms can signiﬁcantly enhance the innovation productivity by
creating certain policies (i.e. open business model) [6] and practices/processes.

3 Methodology

In this section we describe the surveyed company more thoroughly and elaborate on the
survey design, analysis and threats to validity.

3.1 About the company

The company, which is a multi-national corporation with approximately 5,000 employ-
ees globally, develop embedded devices and the studied branch is focused on software
development for communication hubs and additional connected devices in an internet
of things (IoT) fashion. We consider the studied company a representative case [28] for
similar ones, and hypothesize that the ﬁndings have a much broader generality than just

4

Johan Lin˚aker et al.

this company. The studied branch of the company has 1,600 employees, of which 800
work on software development for the devices, and 100 work on connected devices.

The company develops software in an agile fashion and uses software product line
management (SPL) [25]. The company has deﬁned more than 20,000 features and sys-
tem requirements across all the product lines. Considering the innovation aspect, the
company is moving from a closed innovation model to an open innovation model [6],
through the use of open source software to exploit the external resources to accelerate
their innovation process. The open source solution, referred to as the platform, is the
base for their software product line projects and derived products. New projects on the
product line typically entails 60 to 80 new features with an average of 12 new system
requirements per feature. There are more than 20 to 25 development teams develop
these features.

3.2 Survey design

An internal online survey [11] was designed in collaboration between the researchers
and company representatives, running an internal project, aimed at assessing and im-
proving the innovation climate in the company. The questionnaire is composed of three
major parts:

1. Factors that contribute to the innovation climate, based on Ekvall’s scheme [9].
2. Questions on the four types of innovation (product, process, organizational and

marketing) and their relation, based on the OECD model [1].

3. Factors that hinder and help innovation, based on Jansen et al.’s Open Software

Enterprise model [15].

In addition to ranking and preference questions, the survey had ﬁelds for free input
for most questions. The questions were deﬁned in several iterations between researchers
and company representatives, particularly to make the terminology of the survey un-
derstandable for the participants. Further, the survey was piloted to a small group of
company representatives before the ﬁnal launch.

One particular term was given certain care, namely marketing innovation. The orig-
inal deﬁnition is that a marketing innovation is the implementation of a new marketing
method involving signiﬁcant changes in product design or packaging, product place-
ment, product promotion or pricing [1, §169]. However, in the company context, the
term was perceived to be only related to what the marketing department was responsible
for, and thus too narrow. Therefore, we replaced the term with business innovation and
extended it to cover the process where the needs of the customers are captured as input
for the product planning. This extends business innovation into the area of Require-
ments Engineering, which can be seen as a software engineering process, i.e. is covered
by the process innovation deﬁnition. This area is therefore somewhat overlapped, but
with the general distinction that high level capturing of requirements is mainly covered
by the business innovation deﬁnition.

The survey was launched via the company intranet in October and November 2013
to about 900 employees via a census sampling, most of them being developers, of which
229 responded, i.e. a response rate of 25%.

A Survey on the Perception of Innovation in a Large Software Organization

5

3.3 Survey analysis

As the surveyed company is product-focused the surveys had a main focus on deter-
mining the level and perception of product innovation. Due to the attempt to address
the more general innovation questions, the analysis focuses on three of the questions,
connecting product innovation to process, business and organizational innovation.

The respondents were asked to “select the more likely scenario” in the following

questions:

– The product innovation triggers the process innovation, or vice versa
– The product innovation triggers the business innovation, or vice versa
– The product innovation triggers the organizational innovation, or vice versa

This gave an ordinal scale with two options to answer which makes any attempt
of drawing conclusions limited, although a general pattern was observed, as shown in
Figure 1. The survey generated 469 free text comments. Except for the three earlier
mentioned questions, comments were mainly gathered from four questions where the
respondents were asked how innovative (s)he perceived the organization to be with
respect to the four types of innovation.

Qualitative analysis with a thematic approach [8] was used to analyze the data,
which was codiﬁed in up to three levels. Based on the codiﬁed data and the comments
in general, perception of innovation concepts were analyzed (Subsection 4.1) and the
connections between product innovation and process, business and organizational in-
novation, respectively were identiﬁed (Subsections 4.2–4.4). Further on, based on the
themes and comments in general, challenges were then identiﬁed and generalized in
regards to the four types of innovations (Subsections 4.5–4.8).

3.4 Threats to validity

The construct validity [17], refers to whether the survey measured what it was intended
to. This can be addressed through e.g. pilot studies, which was performed before the
ofﬁcial launch. Further on, the questions were developed iteratively and based on estab-
lished literature.

In regards to the analysis, a threat to the construct validity is the risk of researcher
subjectivity as the ﬁrst author performed the mapping and main analysis. This was
addressed by having the second and third authors perform their own individual analysis
of the data, and could compare their ﬁndings with that of the ﬁrst author.

External validity regards whether the results be generalized to outside of the sur-
veyed sample [28]. In this paper, we analyze the questions, which can be published
from the company’s conﬁdentiality perspective. Thus, we do not focus on their per-
ceived current innovation status, but rather on the general understanding of innovation
factors and their relations. Thereby, we also focus on the most generalizable aspects,
which we hypothesize are valid for other companies of similar characteristic to the
studied one, as a representative case [28].

A surveys reliability [17] concerns whether the same results can be obtained if the
survey process was repeated. As the sample was obtained through a census sampling
frame and had a response rate of 25% we regard this optimistically. Although, this

6

Johan Lin˚aker et al.

Fig. 1. Triggering relation between the four types of innovation: product, process, business and
organizational. Percentage value shows the share of respondents that select X → Y as the most
likely scenario.

cannot be strengthened until follow-up surveys are performed. This is something that
will be done in the future as the company wants to measure how the internal perception
of innovation develops over time.

4 Results

In this section we present our ﬁndings from the qualitative analysis of the survey re-
sponses. First the general perceptions of innovation is presented based on survey re-
sponses in 1. Then connections between product innovation and process, business and
organizational innovation is presented respectively. Direction of arrows show the in-
novation type triggering the leading innovation (see ﬁg. 1). For instance, the arrow
from process innovation to product innovation shows that 28.9% respondents think that
process innovation leads to product innovation. Similarly, the arrow from product inno-
vation to process innovation suggest that 71.1% respondents think that product innova-
tion lead to process innovation and the same arrow pattern applies for other innovation
types. Finally, the challenges identiﬁed in regards to each innovation type is listed. As
the types of innovation relate to each other, the challenges are structured accruing to the
type where it relates the most, although a challenge may affect more

4.1 Perceptions of innovation

Although not general, it was observed among the comments that some had trouble relat-
ing to the term innovation as such. The borderline between when something goes from
being an improvement or common functionality to an innovation is ﬂuid. “I recognize
that [company] does this often [. . . ] But I’m not sure if it’s really innovative or just
mindless changes.”

Some respondents consider innovation as part of their everyday work, while others
are a bit more unclear on the distinction between their everyday work and innovative
activities, or just creativity as a process. “As a designer the largest part of the task when
bringing forward is to be creative. However there is a difference between being creative
and being innovative.”

A Survey on the Perception of Innovation in a Large Software Organization

7

A reason could be unawareness of what the company counts as innovations and
examples of different types of innovations. “I don’t know much about the innovations
that we do. I didn’t know about the [example feature] for instance”.

Some may not be aware of what they do could actually count as an innovative activ-
ity. “I work with support systems and not product development. Some part of the time
goes into improving how we produce products.”

Further on, some believed that they were not able to perform any innovative activ-
ities as it was not a part of their work description or role. A tester expressed how he
was not able to innovate as he assumed this was a task dedicated to developers. An-
other tester reasoned similarly. “Working with testing so not much improvement in the
product besides some ideas that pops up occasionally.”

This thinking was present on a general level in connection to all of the four types of
innovation. As mentioned, this could be due to that the awareness is limited of how and
where they can innovate. A better understanding needs to be achieved for the different
types of innovations and how these interplay. “Most of all, I would say that I have only
minor insight and understanding of this ﬁeld [of organizational innovation].”

A consequence may be that some believe innovation is not possible. “I don’t think

it is possible to be innovative in this area [organizational innovation].”

Apart from spreading awareness and knowledge, another important factor that needs
consideration is the mindset. “Since I’m not involved in this part of our business then
it’s not in my mindset, but when you now mentioned it I will take it into my consideration
of innovation.”.

4.2 Product innovation vs Process innovation

On the question whether product innovation triggers process innovation, or the other
way around, 71 percent answered the former (see ﬁg.1). Although the percentage points
in one direction, it is clear from the free text answers that this question is more complex
than so.

Processes can be strict and complex, creating overhead and distraction, occupying
time that could have been focused on creative thinking, as pointed out by a respondent.
“If the development process is driven as a rigid framework that is complex and difﬁcult
to understand who decides what and why, then you do not get in the dynamics of ideas.”
This is also identiﬁed as a challenge of process complexity in Subsection 4.6. Al-
though processes can force a static frame on employees, it can help to bring structure
to the innovation process and thereby still encourage innovation and creative thinking.
“. . . well deﬁned and established processes leads to innovative products.”

Another challenge is idea tracing and execution uncertainty (see Subsection 4.5),
which is an area where we hypothesize that well-designed processes can help to clarify
what happens to ideas and the roadmap for how innovations can be pushed through.
Similarly, processes can also help to increase the awareness of the product scope and
the innovation strategies in the organization.

Process innovation may help the organization become more efﬁcient and reduce
waste as can be interpreted by the OECD deﬁnition [1] and as pointed out by a respon-
dent: “. . . process innovation improve performance, simpliﬁes and speeds-up develop-
ment process - thus allowing to have more resources in true product innovation”. This

8

Johan Lin˚aker et al.

aligns with the area of Software Process Improvement [13], which includes possible im-
plications from new or improved tools and techniques. As put by another respondent:
“. . . We need to have the proper techniques, equipment and SW in order to develop new
and improved products.”

The resources made available can be deﬁned as freed-up budget-hours, which can
be used for other purposes, such as time dedicated to activities focused on rendering
product innovation. An organizational and cultural challenge in this case is to actually
make this dedication which demands a committed management. “The process innova-
tions are often meant to make development faster with more quality, but I’m not sure
the gained resources are spent on product innovation.”

Beneﬁcial factors from a process change, other than freed up resources, may also
include an increase in performance and quality as conﬁrmed by the respondents. Al-
though, it is a matter of deﬁnition how software quality relate to product innovation [26],
this will hopefully render in a better product offering which further down the release
ladder may prove to be a trigger of future product innovations.

Hence, by innovating and improving the processes in the correct way and dedicating
the freed up resources to product innovation, process innovation can be seen as a trigger
for product innovation. This is in line with ﬁndings by Lund and Magnusson [22]. On
the other hand, processes are not decoupled from the products. There needs to be an
awareness of product roadmaps and an adaptive mindset as some processes may require
continuous tailoring as a consequence. “I think the general mindset is ”keeping the eye
on the prize”, you see the upcoming releases in the horizon and you adjust the process
to meet those releases.”

The need to adapt is not a simple task and requires both resources and dedication.
Keeping pace with new features and products can be very demanding for an organiza-
tion as pointed out by the respondents. Process changes needs to be quickly adopted for
the organization not to fall behind or get confused, as described in the process innova-
tion challenges (Subsection 4.6).

Just as new products may create a demand for new processes and tools, they can also
be an inspiration for new techniques and solutions. “On the other hand, new products
can also inspire new techniques and HW/SW solutions.”.

4.3 Product innovation vs Business innovation

On the question whether product innovation triggers business innovation, or the other
way around, 75 percent answered the former (see ﬁg.1). As with the previous ques-
tion, although there is a clear majority in one direction, this does not give the complete
answer.

Some see product innovation as the driver with respect to business innovation due
to that “Innovative products are a great source for new business opportunities and
marketing”. Innovative features affects which consumer groups that should be targeted,
and in effect which marketing channels that can be used. The nature of the innova-
tive features also has implications on how the marketing message can be phrased and
communicated. From this point of view, the products both enable and set a demand for
a continuous business innovation that can adapt to changing functionality and feature

A Survey on the Perception of Innovation in a Large Software Organization

9

sets. A good product as foundation, can even be seen as a source of inspiration to ex-
cel business innovation as hinted by the following respondent. “I think everything starts
with the product. If you are a company with ”Wow!”-products then the rest will come. A
consumer will see through (eventually) if the company is only selling a mediocre prod-
uct but have brilliant marketing. However, if we have good products, it will be more
motivating bringing it to the market, which will inspire us to excel also in business
innovation”

From the other perspective, innovative marketing may be a requirement for what
otherwise would be considered a normal product. Competitive products, which are tech-
nically inferior, may very well prove more popular compared to a technically superior
product, due to the awareness and visibility towards the customers, as identiﬁed by the
respondents. Business innovation can create the hype needed to tell about what the in-
novative features are, how they differentiate and how they ﬁt in the customers’ context.
However, as pointed out by the previous quote, if the product does not ﬁll the expecta-
tions, innovative marketing will not be a viable solution in the long run.

New innovative ways are continuously needed to keep pace and capture the demands
from the existing and emerging customer channels, e.g. through end-user feedback [2].
An awareness of what needs the customers have today and will have tomorrow, is an
important input from business and marketing to push the product innovations forward
in the right directions. “Because business innovation brings in new experience directly
from market, new demands and requirements and thus giving a product a right direc-
tion”

This creates a challenge for the organization in terms of synchronization. The view
of what features are to be considered game-changers and prioritized in the release plan-
ning process [5], may prove troublesome due to internal communication gaps between
marketing and product development [16], which may lead to wrong features being
promoted as a consequence. “Scope/product planning, business side and development
[should be] in sync regarding both our innovation initiative [. . . ] and how to drive
innovations all the way to product.”

As explained, there is a dual sided relationship. There is a dependency going in both
directions where one can trigger the other. One respondent provided a concrete example
which summarizes the relationship. “It is pretty much both. Look at the music and ﬁlm
business which has invented new ways of marketing and distribution, but I believe the
wish of distribute TV via satellite has created new products for making it possible and
to get paid for it. Then again we have the Google glasses. Right now they are cool,
but not very useful until we ﬁnd a useful feature for them and that itself will create a
business for them.”

4.4 Product innovation vs Organizational innovation

On the question whether product innovation triggers organizational innovation, or the
other way around, 55 percent answered the former (see ﬁg.1). Opposed to the previous
questions, this was not as clear majority for the product innovation centric view.

Improving and innovating the way in which a company collaborates and interacts
with external parties and stakeholder, can trigger product innovations in several ways.

10

Johan Lin˚aker et al.

Application of open innovation business strategies is one way to accelerate their in-
ternal innovation process [12]. Crowdsourcing ideas, engaging in Open Source com-
munities, welcoming third-party developers, acquiring promising startups and starting
joint-ventures or ecosystems are a couple of activities that falls into the open innova-
tion paradigm originally deﬁned by Chesbrough [6], that may render in new product
innovations.

Creating a more innovative organizational environment with committed employees
is another way that can lead to more product innovations [24], as described by a respon-
dent: “With a ﬂexible and happy organization that makes people get looser boundaries
I believe we can get a more innovative climate” Bringing people from different back-
grounds and functional areas creates diversity and enables for new discussion to arise
and to discuss ideas from new angles [4, 18], or as put by the following respondent:
“Connecting colleagues which hadn’t possibility to communicate before allows to dis-
cuss more problems and ideas.”. Calantone et al. [4] adds that this cross-functional
integration also allows for the employees to evolve their skills by learning and sharing
knowledge amongst each other, which is important for product development.

This connects to a need for a general awareness of what has been done, and what
is being worked on. “. . . more often than not these innovations are ”hidden” in small
segments of the company, not actively promoted and spread (and that’s both good and
bad, many projects dies when they need to become too big).” By communicating items
such as features, functionality, experienced problems and related solution across inter-
nal borders, cross-functional views can be established more automatically. A solution in
one project may turn out to solve the same issue or create new ideas in another project,
which could either be considered a process or a product innovation. This relates to the
concept of inner source [21] and how it can help organizations work more open and
cross-functional, and in the end become more innovative [23].

Organizational barriers and communication issues is another area, where organiza-
tional innovation may trigger product innovation in the long term perspective. When
products or processes stretch over multiple business units or projects, this can create
room for bureaucracy, different prioritization schemes, culture and politics, to mention
a few factors [18]. “Some sections within the company are quite innovative, but when it
comes to cross-functional agreements and alignment, there always seems to be a resis-
tance to change and adapt to new ways of working and safeguarding what seems to the
best for ”me/my team” is more important than what’s best for the company.”

Pushing through and spreading an idea across these borders require a high level of
internal permeability. “Organization organized for better collaboration (=no ﬁltering,
no proxies, smaller proximity, time zone, etc. . . ) is more likely to produce more in-
novative ideas. Layering, direct reporting, micro management, and similar old-school
practices are killing innovation.”

Looking from the other perspective, new product innovations will create new de-
mands and implications which will give rise for possibilities and triggers for organi-
zational innovation [4]. “New and exciting products means we have to adapt how we
work to support these in the best-possible, not only from an engineering or software
perspective, but for example from the launch projects etc.”

A Survey on the Perception of Innovation in a Large Software Organization

11

As has been discussed in regards to previous sections on the matter of product in-
novation versus process and business innovation, there exists a dual relationship here as
well as exempliﬁed by the response: “Organizational innovation increases our capabil-
ity to handle new and complex tasks. Innovative products will require us to handle new
or more complex tasks and without room for growth, product innovation will ﬁzzle.”

4.5 Product innovation challenges

In the responses, several aspects were mentioned as challenges to the product innova-
tion.

a) Idea tracing and execution uncertainty – Even though there may be a rich pool
of innovative ideas being produced and a general will to contribute, it is important to
maintain and support it. Knowledge and awareness of what happens to ideas contributed
to the innovation development process is important for the contributors to feel that they
are taken seriously and that it is worth to continue contributing, which in turn gives an
increased innovation capacity for the company [18]. When the ideas come bottom-up
there needs to be a feedback loop top-down that stimulates this need of information as
conﬁrmed by Koc and Ceylan [19], and Wnuk et al. [29].

b) Short term perspective – By having a narrowed foresight, release planning tend to
prioritize non-unique features which renders in low diversity in the product range, thus
making the company being a follower of competitors rather than a leader. A longer time
perspective needs to be integrated into the company culture, together with a positive
mindset for game changers and innovative features to be created.

c) Product scope and innovation strategy – Uncertainty about the product roadmap
and feature scope leads to risks that the creative minds of the company are misdirected.
A common and established innovation strategy can help deﬁning the product scope and
frame where ideas are needed suggested by Koc and Ceylan [19], and Wnuk et al. [29].
d) Limiting environment and mindset – Soft factors such as employees feeling that
they can have a free mindset and share ideas openly is important for an innovative envi-
ronment. It must be okay to test new ideas, but also to fail. These are factors, triggered
by Ekvall’s innovation climate model [9].

e) Restriction by external stakeholders – A commercial product company can have
many stakeholders, some not being the end customer. This may include distributors and
service providers further down the value chain, adding value and modiﬁcations to the
product before they reach the ﬁnal buyers. These stakeholders put requirements that
may prevent and limit the feature scope possible to address. This ﬁlter risks to kill ideas
inside the company and ignore needs, both identiﬁed and unidentiﬁed, from the end
customers. This challenge is in line with Conboy and Morgan’s ﬁndings [7].

f) Limited time for innovation activities – Tight project budgets and short deadlines
are two factors that can restrict time available for idea creation. Developers usually
have pet projects and ideas they would like to work on, some even dedicate their spare
time for this purpose. By allowing the time, this can prove a valuable source of product
innovation as suggested by Conboy and Morgan [7].

g) Cross-functional resources – Bringing new people together creates new product
ideas and can boost innovation development. Cross-functional labs-sections and ded-

12

Johan Lin˚aker et al.

icated innovation team are two examples suggested by Conboy and Morgan [7], and
Koc [18].

4.6 Process innovation challenges

This section presents the challenges, directly related to process innovations.

a) Process change too slow – The introduction of a new process may be cumbersome
for several reasons, with the effect that the changes are implemented slowly. This can
cause confusion for employees being caught between two states – before and after the
change – and also result in an unsynchronized organization as different parts may adapt
faster than others.

b) Process change too often – Another issue with respect to process change is that
they may happen too often. This can be a cause effect relationship with an adoption
process, as old processes risk being outdated once introduced if done in a too slow
and inefﬁcient manner. When the environment changes, for example technology and
dependencies towards partner’s progress, so does the requirements on the internal tools
and processes have to change at the same pace. This can also relate to organizational
innovation.

c) Process change top down – Problems can arise when a process is introduced top-
down instead of bottom-up. Managers may not always know what is the most efﬁcient
way to work compared to those actually performing the work. This challenge is also in
line with the ﬁndings of Qin [27], and Wnuk et al. [29].

4.7 Business innovation challenges

Challenges related to business innovation are about alignment with the market and end
users.

a) Reaching the end-customers – When there are layers between the producer and
end-customer, for example, distributors and service providers, promotion of new ideas
and product innovations to end-customers gets complicated. As technology and social
habits evolve, new innovative ways are needed to keep pace with the different forums
for communication used by the end-customers of today and tomorrow. Examples of
such phenomena are software ecosystems [30].

b) Product and marketing synchronization – The views on what the top innovative
features are may differ between different parts of the company. A misalignment like this
can create confusion between marketing and product development. This could render in
the wrong features being promoted. The suggested needs of the end customers should
be communicated and synchronized to all relevant parts of the organization, e.g. product
planning, marketing and development.

4.8 Organizational innovation challenges

Organizational innovation challenges relate to collaboration, communication and change.
a) Closed organizational borders – If the organization is too introvert and closed,
opportunities, possible collaborations, sources of ideas and other possible inputs to their

A Survey on the Perception of Innovation in a Large Software Organization

13

internal innovation process might be missed. By opening up the company borders for
external collaboration and inﬂuence, new possibilities can arise both in regards to new
innovations and markets, as described by the Open Innovation paradigm [6].

b) Intra organizational collaboration – Barriers and layers can prevent otherwise
prosperous and potential collaborations between business units in organizations. Exam-
ples may be different sub-priorities of features between projects and multiple number
of mangers creating a complex and bureaucratic hierarchy as identiﬁed among the re-
spondents and conﬁrmed by Koc [18]. These are related to what Bjarnason et al refer to
as “gaps” [3]. Koc further points out that such cross-functional integration demands a
high level of coordination, otherwise it will rather have a negative impact on the product
innovation.

c) Intra organizational learning – Unawareness of what has been done in other parts
of the company can create inefﬁciency and missed possibilities. In regards to process
innovation, tools, technologies and processes from one part may prove its self superior
or complementary to those used in other parts. And in regards to product innovation,
a commoditized good or service from one business unit may turn out as innovative
if added to the value proposition in another business unit’s product chain. This is a
challenge in-common with inner source [21], but also one of the ways in how it can
help organizations become more innovative by using it as a type of intra-organizational
open innovation [23].

5 Conclusions

The view on what innovation is and where it can be performed is a diversiﬁed topic.
OECD [1] differentiates between four types: product, process, market and organiza-
tional innovation. These were adopted in the survey on which this paper is based on,
with a redeﬁnition of market innovation into business innovation. The original deﬁni-
tions are general and applicable on a multiple number of ﬁelds. This paper puts them in
the context of software engineering characterized by the opinions of people involved in
different levels of a large software development organization.

The perception of the term innovation, to answer the ﬁrst research question (See
RQ1, Section 1), is diversiﬁed. Even though it is not general, some had trouble relating
to the term innovation as such and when a feature or certain work can be classiﬁed ac-
cordingly. Some believed that they were not able to perform any innovative activities as
it was not a part of their work description or role, which was present in connection to all
of the four types of innovation. Apart from awareness and knowledge, another impor-
tant factor that also needs consideration is the mindset of the employees that innovation
is possible and something that they can help to create.

The different types cannot be considered isolated or decoupled which answers the
second research question (See RQ2, Section 1). Connections between product innova-
tion and process, business and organizational innovation exists in both directions. Intro-
duction of product innovations creates demand and possibilities for processes, market-
ing and organization to adapt and optimize as the conditions has been changed. Interde-
pendencies may require tailoring being done, either as a direct consequence or as a side
effect. On the other way around, introduction of a process, business or organizational

14

Johan Lin˚aker et al.

innovation can change the environment and conditions for how product development is
being done. Inputs such as new technologies, ideas, resources and know-how are exam-
ple factors which can be considered a cause behind a product innovation effect. Open
innovation could be classiﬁed as an organizational innovation that can render inputs to
the internal innovation process [6].

Challenges correlated to the different innovation types were also identiﬁed, with
respect to the third research question (See RQ3, Section 1). These give a context to
the term of innovation that covers parts other than the more normal conception of in-
novation in regards to just products. Some challenges may target more than one type
of innovation, e.g. internal communication which can cause issues for introduction on
new processes and organizations as well as hinder ideas to be spread and discussed.

For future research it would be interesting with studies conﬁrming and exemplifying
the connections described, for example how process innovation could trigger product
innovation. An anticipated challenge will be to trace a cause effect relationship and con-
necting the two areas. Another area also includes conﬁrming the challenges identiﬁed,
and further characterizing the innovation types from a software engineering perspective.

References

1. Oslo Manual – Guidelines for collecting and interpreting innovation data. OECD and Eu-

rostat, 3rd edition, 2005.

2. M. Bano. Aligning services and requirements with user feedback. In Requirements Engi-

neering Conference (RE), 2014 IEEE 22nd International, pages 473–478, Aug 2014.

3. Elizabeth Bjarnason, Krzysztof Wnuk, and Bj¨orn Regnell. Requirements are slipping
through the gaps - A case study on causes & effects of communication gaps in large-scale
In RE 2011, 19th IEEE International Requirements Engineering
software development.
Conference, Trento, Italy, August 29 2011 - September 2, 2011, pages 37–46, 2011.

4. Roger J Calantone, S Tamer Cavusgil, and Yushan Zhao. Learning orientation, ﬁrm inno-
vation capability, and ﬁrm performance. Industrial marketing management, 31(6):515–524,
2002.

5. P¨ar Carlshamre. Release planning in market-driven software product development: Provok-

ing an understanding. Requirements Engineering, 7(3):139–151, 2002.

6. Henry William Chesbrough. Open innovation: the new imperative for creating and proﬁting

from technology. Harvard Business School Press, Boston, Mass., 2003.

7. Kieran Conboy and Lorraine Morgan. Beyond the customer: Opening the agile systems
development process. Information and Software Technology, 53(5):535–542, May 2011.
8. Daniela S Cruzes, Tore Dyb˚a, Per Runeson, and Martin H¨ost. Case studies synthesis: A the-
matic, cross-case, and narrative synthesis worked example. Empirical Software Engineering,
Online, 2014.

9. G¨oran Ekvall. Organizational climate for creativity and innovation. European Journal of

Work and Organizational Psychology, 5(1):105–123, 1996.

10. Robert G. Fichman. Going beyond the dominant paradigm for information technology inno-
vation research: Emerging concepts and methods. Journal of the Association for Information
Systems, 5(8):11, 2004.

11. Arlene Fink. The Survey Handbook. Sage, 2nd edition, 2003.
12. Elad Harison and Heli Koski. Applying open innovation in business strategies: Evidence

from ﬁnnish software ﬁrms. Research Policy, 39(3):351–359, 2010.

A Survey on the Perception of Innovation in a Large Software Organization

15

13. Donald E. Harter, Mayuram S. Krishnan, and Sandra A. Slaughter. Effects of process matu-
rity on quality, cycle time, and effort in software product development. Management Science,
46(4):451–466, 2000.

14. Jim Highsmith and Alistair Cockburn. Agile software development: The business of innova-

tion. Computer, 34(9):120–127, 2001.

15. Slinger Jansen, Sjaak Brinkkemper, Jurriaan Souer, and Lutzen Luinenburg. Shades of gray:
Opening up a software producing organization with the open software enterprise model.
Journal of Systems and Software, 85(7):1495 – 1510, 2012.

16. Lena Karlsson, ˚Asa G. Dahlstedt, Bj¨orn Regnell, Johan Natt och Dag, and Anne Persson.
Requirements engineering challenges in market-driven software development – an interview
study with practitioners. Information and Software Technology, 49(6):588 – 604, 2007.
17. Barbara A Kitchenham and Shari L Pﬂeeger. Personal opinion surveys. In Guide to Advanced

Empirical Software Engineering, pages 63–92. Springer, 2008.

18. Tufan Koc. Organizational determinants of innovation capacity in software companies. Com-

puters & industrial engineering, 53(3):373–385, 2007.

19. Tufan Koc and Cemil Ceylan. Factors impacting the innovative capacity in large-scale com-

panies. Technovation, 27(3):105–114, 2007.

20. Gwanhoo Lee and Weidong Xia. The ability of information systems development project
teams to respond to business and technology changes: a study of ﬂexibility measures. Euro-
pean Journal of Information Systems, 14:75–92, March 2005.

21. Johan Lin˚aker, Maria Krantz, and Martin H¨ost. On infrastructure for facilitation of inner
In Product-Focused Software Process Improvement,

source in small development teams.
pages 149–163. Springer, 2014.

22. Katarina Lund and Mats Magnusson. The delicate coexistence of standardized work routines
and innovation. In Proceedings of the 19th International Product Development Management
Conference, Manchester, UK, June 2012.

23. Lorraine Morgan, Joseph Feller, and Patrick Finnegan. Exploring inner source as a form of

intraorganisational open innovation. 2011.

24. Abhishek Nirjar. Accruing innovation in software ﬁrms through employees’ commitment.
International Journal of Indian Culture and Business Management, 6(4):391–409, January
2013.

25. Klaus Pohl, G¨unter B¨ockle, and Frank J. van der Linden. Software Product Line Engineering:
Foundations, Principles and Techniques. Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., Secaucus, NJ,
USA, 2005.

26. CK Prahalad and MS Krishnan. The new meaning of quality in the information age. Harvard

business review, 77(5):109–18, 1998.

27. Shaowen Qin. Managing process change in software organizations: Experience and reﬂec-

tion. Software Process: Improvement and Practice, 12(5):429–435, 2007.

28. Per Runeson, Martin H¨ost, Austen Rainer, and Bj¨orn Regnell. Case Study Research in Soft-

ware Engineering – Guidelines and Examples. Wiley, 2012.

29. Krzysztof Wnuk, Dietmar Pfahl, Davide Callele, and Even Andr´e Karlsson. How can open
source software development help requirements management gain the potential of open in-
In Proceedings of the 2012 6th ACM-IEEE International
novation: an exploratory study.
Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement (ESEM), pages 271 – 9,
Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2012.

30. Krzysztof Wnuk, Per Runeson, Matilda Lantz, and Oskar Weijden. Bridges and barriers
to software ecosystem participation - a case study. Information and Software Technology,
56(11):1493–1507, 2014.

