2
2
0
2

l
u
J

1
3

]
E
S
.
s
c
[

1
v
6
4
7
1
0
.
8
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Collaboration in Open Government Data
Ecosystems: Open Cross-sector Sharing and
Co-development of Data and Software

Johan Lin˚aker1 and Per Runeson1

Lund University, Ole R¨omers v¨ag 3, Lund, Sweden
{johan.linaker,per.runeson}@cs.lth.se

Abstract. Background : Open innovation highlights the potential ben-
eﬁts of external collaboration and knowledge-sharing, often exempliﬁed
through Open Source Software (OSS). The public sector has thus far
mainly focused on the sharing of Open Government Data (OGD), often
with a supply-driven approach with limited feedback-loops. We hypoth-
esize that public sector organizations can extend the open innovation
beneﬁts by also creating platforms, where OGD, related OSS, and open
standards are collaboratively developed and shared. Objective: The ob-
jective of this study is to explore how public sector organizations in
the role of platform providers facilitate such collaboration in the form
of OGD ecosystems and how the ecosystem’s governance may be struc-
tured to support the collaboration. Method : We conduct an exploratory
multiple-case study of two such ecosystems, focused on OGD related
to the Swedish labor market and public transport sector, respectively.
Data is gathered through interviews, document studies, and prolonged
engagement at one of the platform providers. Results: The study presents
governance structure and collaboration practices of the two ecosystems
and discusses how these contribute to the platform providers’ goals. The
case studies highlight the need for platform providers to take an active
and multi-functional role in enabling the sharing of data and software
from and between the members of the ecosystem. Conclusions: We con-
clude that OGD ecosystems oﬀer public sector organizations a possibility
to catalyze the potential innovation output of OGD, but that it requires
investment and adoption of an open and collaborative mindset.

Keywords: Open Government Data · Open Source Software · Open
Standard · Ecosystem · Public Sector.

1

Introduction

Open Innovation has been widely adopted among software companies through
the use of Open Source Software (OSS) as a means to share costs and accelerate
innovation [14]. In the public sector, however, the focus has been more on sharing
of Open Government Data (OGD) as a way to drive innovation [2] and less on
OSS [3]. To catalyze the potential innovation output [2], data providers and

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

Johan Lin˚aker and Per Runeson

data users may form a business ecosystem around the OGD [25]. Actors within
an OGD ecosystem together create a value network, where the OGD is enriched
from raw data into valuable content to be used in new products and services [12].
Interaction is usually limited to feedback on the quality and what data-sets to
release next [4,8,15], although the need for more collaboration is highlighted [20,
23].

Looking at Open Source Software (OSS) ecosystems (also commonly referred
to as communities) [6], actors collaborate to a much a higher degree through the
co-development of the OSS. Together they evolve the OSS in an open setting
where new functionality is continuously asserted, discussed, and implemented
and thereby they accelerate the innovation and development beyond what any
single member of the ecosystem could perform alone [14].

We hypothesize that by adopting the collaborative practices, OGD ecosys-
tems would be able to elicit similar beneﬁts [21, 23]. Further, we hypothesize
that both the sharing and adoption of OGD would be catalyzed by extending
collaboration to include the development of related standards, APIs, and sup-
porting tools, frameworks, and example applications as OSS [8, 20, 25]. With
these characteristics, we deﬁne an OGD ecosystem as a networked community of
organizations, which base their relations to each other on a common interest in
an underpinning technological platform consisting of OGD and related OSS and
open standards, and collaborate through the exchange of information, resources
and artifacts, adapted from [10, 25].

Existing research has mainly focused on the collaborative practices used in
OSS ecosystems [1, 10], and has in terms of OGD ecosystems [2] been limited,
both regarding collaboration on OGD or any related software or standard, even
though identiﬁed as a need [17, 20, 23]. The research goal of this study is to
therefore to explore how collaboration in OGD ecosystems may be facilitated from
the platform providers’ point of view and how the ecosystems’ governance may be
structured to support the collaboration. We ﬁnd this as an interesting perspective
as trust towards the platform provider is pivotal in order to enable collaboration
and growth of an ecosystem [9, 12].

This paper presents a multiple-case study [22] of two OGD ecosystems in
which OSS, open standards, and related collaborative practices are adopted, aim-
ing to foster collaboration and increase the adoption of OGD. The two ecosys-
tems are initiated and governed by public sector organizations in the role of
platform providers and focus on OGD related to the Swedish labor market and
public transport sector. We present the governance structure and collaboration
practices of these ecosystems and discuss how these contribute to the platform
providers’ goals.

2 Background

Below we provide an overview of OGD and software (including OSS) ecosystems
and present a governance model used in the analysis of the two case studies.

Collaboration in Open Government Data Ecosystems

3

2.1 Ecosystems for Open Source Software and Government Data

Software ecosystems is a rather mature [1, 10] but yet expanding ﬁeld of re-
search. Originating from the ﬁeld of business ecosystems (and in turn its bio-
logical ancestor) [7], it oﬀers a lens for analyzing how networked communities
of organizations collaborate around their common interest in a central software
technology [13]. Other deﬁnitions refer to technological platforms underpinning
the ecosystem [10], which in a wider sense may consist of either technologies,
products, or services, serving in the common interest of the ecosystem.

For OSS ecosystems, the OSS project makes up the technological platform
underpinning its community which we refer to as the ecosystem [6]. Similarly,
OGD and its related APIs can also be viewed as a platform, underpinning the
surrounding ecosystem of actors [25]. OGD ecosystems and similar concepts [23,
24] are however not as well explored as software and OSS ecosystems.

Oliveira et al. [17] deﬁne a data ecosystem as “socio-technical complex net-
work in which actors interact and collaborate with each other to ﬁnd, archive,
publish, consume, or reuse data as well as to foster innovation, create value, and
support new businesses. OGD ecosystems, or Government Data Ecosystems as
referred to by Oliveira et al. [17], are based on OGD initiatives and focused on
promoting the use and publication of OGD.

In terms of roles in these ecosystems, a general distinction can be made be-
tween data providers and data users [25]. The roles can be further reﬁned into
data providers, service providers, data brokers, application developers, applica-
tion users, and infrastructure and tool providers [8,11]. The data provider is usu-
ally constituted by a public-sector organization [17]. Services or functions needed
include an infrastructure to share the data (preferably from multiple providers),
documentation, tools for application developers, help in ﬁnding use-cases, as
well as the possibility to discuss, provide feedback and make requests [4,8,25]. A
general observation regards the need for improved feedback-loops, collaboration
and a more demand-driven publication of OGD [4, 15, 20, 25].

This study aims to investigate how such collaboration may be facilitated,
both in terms of sharing and co-developing OGD, related OSS, and open stan-
dards. We hypothesize that this will provide further opportunities and beneﬁts
of what open innovation has to oﬀer to the platform providers and their ecosys-
tems [14, 21].

2.2 Ecosystem Roles and Governance Structure

Existing research is limited in regard to governance in OGD ecosystems [17].
Governance has received more attention for software ecosystems [1]. Three types
of roles are commonly referred to [7, 10]. The ﬁrst role is that of the platform
provider who is the owner and supplier of the platform and thereby also usually
the orchestrator of the ecosystem. As an orchestrator, the platform provider also
decides on the governance model for the ecosystem, meaning the ways in which
it maintains control and decides on the direction, but also on the governance
structure, meaning “the distribution of rights and responsibilities among the

4

Johan Lin˚aker and Per Runeson

Fig. 1. Overview of the proposed governance model adapted from Nakakoji et al. [16].

[ecosystem’s members], and the rules and protocols that need to be followed in
order to make decisions regarding the [ecosystem]” [1].

Keystone and Niche players are two other roles within an ecosystem. A
keystone is an actor who nurtures a symbiotic relationship with the ecosystem
and its other actors, looking to actively improve its health [9]. Usually, they have
a close connection with the platform provider, who also may be referred to as
a keystone if it has similar symbiotic intents. Niche players are actors focused
more on a speciﬁc niche of the market, or use-case, and is primarily a user of
the resources provided by the ecosystem [7].

For OSS ecosystems, the platform provider can be the owner of the OSS
project, usually either a software vendor or the ecosystem of actors directly or
via a proxy organization (e.g., a foundation) [18]. Governance, however, does not
have to be aligned with the ownership. In more autocratic ecosystems, it can be
centered around a vendor or individual, while more democratic ecosystems it is
distributed [5]. In the latter case, control of the OSS project is usually maintained
by a central group of actors who have gained a level of inﬂuence by proving merit,
building trust, and social capital through contributions to the OSS project.

2.3 Governance Model for Open Government Data Ecosystems

A popular way of illustrating the governance structure of an OSS ecosystem
is the Onion model [16], where the center is those in control (see Fig. 1). The
closest layers may be those who contribute actively to the project and thereby
maintain an inﬂuence although not in direct control. For each outer layer, actors
become less active in terms of contributions and thereby decrease in inﬂuence
on the OSS project. Robles et al. [19] recently applied the model in a case study
on the X-Road OSS project, an originally Estonian eGovernment project for
creating a data-sharing infrastructure, which now is governed jointly by Esto-
nian and Finnish government agencies. The project is centrally controlled, and
contributions are primarily made by companies on behalf of, and paid by, the
government agencies.

For OGD ecosystems, we consider the core to be occupied by the platform
provider (see Fig. 1), which is either the government entity (or entities in collab-
oration) which provide OGD via a software platform where APIs and supporting
tools, frameworks, and example applications are available as OSS. Depending on

Collaboration in Open Government Data Ecosystems

5

the speciﬁc ecosystem structure a number of layers follow. In layers closest to
the core are the Keystone members including actors that are of special impor-
tance to the platform provider and the overall health of the ecosystem [9]. In the
following layer, Passive members of similar roles may be found although these
are more focused on addressing their speciﬁc niche or use-case. In the last and
outer layer are the End-users of the OGD, either directly or via the proxy of
applications and services produced by the actors in the inner layers of the model.
As illustrated in Fig. 1, actors can in general also be divided between three

groups in terms of their usage of and contribution to the platform:

– A Data consumer uses the data available via the platform.
– A Data producer contributes data, either actively via a donation to the
platform, or passively by letting the platform provider collect data from
them, which is then made available via the platform.

– A General contributor is not necessarily a consumer or producer of data,
but in some other way contributes to the platform and health of the ecosys-
tem, e.g., through knowledge sharing or contributing new or to existing OSS
projects related to the platform.
Actors can be further categorized based on their type of operations, including
e.g., service providers, application developers, data brokers, infrastructure and
tool providers, and potentially additional data providers [8, 12]. We expect this
type of categorization to be dependent on each ecosystem.

3 Research Design

An exploratory multiple-case study [22] was conducted to investigate two in-
stances of OGD ecosystems. Case1 is the JobTech Dev ecosystem, initiated and
facilitated by The Swedish Public Employment Service. Case2 is the Traﬁklab
ecosystem, initiated and facilitated by Samtraﬁken. The unit of analysis is the
ecosystems’ governance [1].

We use an adapted version of the Onion model (see section 2.3) to struc-
ture and analyze the ﬁndings of the two ecosystems’ governance. The model is
commonly used for describing the governance in OSS ecosystems [16] and was
recently applied to a government-initiated OSS ecosystem [19].

The research eﬀort was initiated with Case 1, where the ﬁrst author of this
study is embedded as an action researcher, as a part of a long-term research
project. The researcher was hence able to generate in-depth knowledge through
prolonged engagement along with access to extensive documentation. The docu-
mentation along with ﬁeld notes could be used to triangulate ﬁndings along with
three semi-structured interviews. To ensure construct validity [22], we based the
questionnaire on earlier work on assessing the governance structure of software
ecosystems [1, 10]. The interviewees were the platform’s product owner, commu-
nity manager, and policy strategist.

Data gathering from Case 1 was performed before any intervention had been
introduced from the action research. To avoid researcher bias, peer-debrieﬁng
between the ﬁrst and second authors was performed [22].

6

Johan Lin˚aker and Per Runeson

Fig. 2. Overview of the governance structure of the two cases in this study, JobTech
Dev (left) and Traﬁklab (right), based on the governance model presented in section 2.3.

For Case 2, data were gathered in a similar manner through a semi-structured
interview with the platform’s product manager, using the same questionnaire. All
interviews were audio-recorded with additional notes taken. A threat regarding
the reliability concerns that only the ﬁrst author conducted the interviews [22].
To mitigate the threat, member-checking was performed in both cases where
synthesized ﬁndings were presented to all interviewees who were asked for cor-
rectness, misinterpretations, and redundancy.

4 Results

Below we present the results from our two studied cases, JobTech Dev and
Traﬁklab.

4.1 Case 1: JobTech Dev

JobTech Dev is an ecosystem, initiated in 2018, bringing actors together, op-
erating within or in relation to the Swedish labor market to collaborate on a
common platform of OGD, connected APIs, and complementary OSS projects.
The ecosystem and its platform are developed and orchestrated by the Swedish
Public Employment Service (SPES), a Swedish national government agency re-
sponsible for enabling the match-making between job-seekers and employers on
the labor market. JobTech Dev was created as a part of this mission with the
intention to enable the actors in the ecosystem to accelerate their innovation pro-
cess, improve their services, and thereby improving the digital match-making on
the labor market.

Platform Content The platform consists of four parts: Jobs, Taxonomy, Ca-
reer, and Search.

Jobs is a service intended to collect all available job advertisements on the
Swedish labor market and make these available through an API. The online
ads are collected from the ten organizations in the labor market, providing the
majority of the available advertisements.

Collaboration in Open Government Data Ecosystems

7

Taxonomy is a collection of skills and job titles and relationships between
them. The data set is developed and maintained within SPES. By opening up the
data through APIs, the actors in the ecosystem are enabled to “speak the same
language” enabling e.g., improved reporting and statistics and match-making
between job advertisements and job-seekers’ resumes.

Career is (unlike Taxonomy and Jobs) not OGD. It is a service where job-
seekers can store their resumes on a central location in an encrypted format. The
job-seekers can grant and withdraw permission to organizations, e.g., recruitment
ﬁrms, social networks, and insurance ﬁrms to access their information. The ser-
vice is based on the MyData principles1 and enables job-seekers to only have to
maintain one copy of their resume and to distribute and manage their data with
kept control over their integrity and privacy.

Search is an OSS search engine that enables actors to search among available
job advertisements. Search is available both through an API and as an OSS
project which can be adopted and integrated by the ecosystem’s actors.

Ecosystem Governance Structure In terms of operations, the members of
the ecosystem can generally be categorized within one of the areas: 1) recruiting
and staﬃng ﬁrms, 2) education and guidance providers, 3) national, regional or
local governments, 4) workers’ unions, 5) employers’ associations, 6) job adver-
tisers, and 7) job seekers. Depending on the category, a member’s interest in the
platform may be limited to certain parts of the platform.

Considering the governance structure, SPES is positioned in the center as
the platform provider orchestrating and governing the ecosystem (see Fig. 4,
left). SPES ultimately decides on requirements and road-map for the platform,
including what data to make available, when, and how. They perform the nec-
essary development and maintenance and provide the infrastructure needed to
access and use the data.

Outside of SPES are the members whose opinions may be considered as ex-
tra important for SPES in terms of developing the platform and growing the
ecosystem. These members may, e.g., have a large user base, or valuable compe-
tencies and resources, and thereby contribute to the health of the ecosystem. In
the second layer are the general members and in layer three the end-users. Each
layer is viewed to potentially consist of members from all types of operations.

Orchestration and Collaboration Due to the limited internal resources,
SPES does not have the capacity to maintain formal and direct relationships
with all ecosystem members. Teams carrying out development inside SPES there-
fore primarily work and communicate through close relationships with the key
members to optimize the impact. However, SPES is striving to adopt an open
development model and maintain an open dialogue where the whole ecosystem
(including all layers in Fig 1) can inﬂuence the direction of the platform.

1 https://mydata.org/guiding-principles/

8

Johan Lin˚aker and Per Runeson

Anyone can, for example, request and discuss a new feature, an API, or
data-set through a synchronous open communication platform or by attending
occasional meetups arranged by SPES. It is also possible to contribute to the de-
velopment, as all source code for the APIs is available as OSS. To lower adoption
barriers of the data provided via the platform, example applications are devel-
oped and released as OSS. Members consuming the data, speciﬁcally startups,
have expressed the value provided by these examples as it helps them understand
use-cases and accelerate their development. Contributions to the OSS have been
limited to bug reports and feature requests, while the intention is to encourage
and enable members to contribute both new projects and to exist.

In terms of data, there are examples – although limited – of members pro-
ducing and contributing directly to the platform. One example is a set of soft
skills and their relationship to diﬀerent job titles, which was contributed to the
Taxonomy part of the platform. Processes are not yet established for how these
types of contributions should be managed; a process more simpler if considering
OSS. In this case, a formal contract was established between the two parties.

Close collaborations and direct dialogues with key members have been im-
portant to establish the ecosystem and gain general acceptance. For example, the
collection of all job-ads on the market and making these freely available, made
incumbents oﬀering recruiting and staﬃng services initially question the intent
from SPES as well as the suggested beneﬁts. SPES views the commoditization
of job-advertisement data, as with the ecosystem at large, as a way to push
the actors working with digital match-making and guidance services forward,
nurturing innovation and lowering barriers to entry for new actors.

After a more than two-year process, even the more conservative incumbents
started to accept the ecosystem and see potential beneﬁts with it. A formal col-
laboration was initiated between SPES and the ten largest job advertisement
providers where they agreed to allow job-advertisements to be collected. Once
collected, the ads are converted to an industry-speciﬁc open standard, and then
enriched with metadata such as date of publishing and deadline for applications.
A compromise was reached to only provide a “stub” of the advertisements, mean-
ing that only that job title, metadata, and a link to the original advertisement
would be provided through the platform’s API.

4.2 Case 2: Traﬁklab

Traﬁklab is an ecosystem, initiated in 2011, that brings actors within the Swedish
public transport sector together to collaborate on a platform with open traﬃc
data, connected APIs, and complementary OSS projects. The ecosystem’s vi-
sion is to facilitate the creation of new services that makes it easier and more
attractive to travel with public transport. The ecosystem and its platform are
developed and orchestrated by Samtraﬁken, a corporate entity co-owned by all
the regional public transport authorities and most of the commercial transport
operators in Sweden. The commercial transport operators also have the option
of being a partner to Samtraﬁken.

Collaboration in Open Government Data Ecosystems

9

Platform Content The platform consists of data-sets and APIs, either main-
tained by Samtraﬁken or independently by members of the ecosystem. All data
hosted on the Traﬁklab-platform is released with a custom license based on the
principles of the Creative Commons Attribution-license.

Four APIs provide static and real-time data on public transport, related to,
for example, time-tables and interruptions. This data is currently made available
in two types of standard formats, maintained by Samtraﬁken and gathered from
the regional public transport authorities and private operators in accordance
with a government directive. Two further APIs provide time-table data for a trip-
planner, an externally procured product that is oﬀered for free to the ecosystem.
Certain APIs are maintained by other organizations, both public and pri-
vate, and made available on the Traﬁklab-platform. Data includes time-table
and service data from Stockholm Public Transport and traﬃc information from
the Swedish Transport Administration. The platform also links to related APIs
that are maintained and hosted by other organizations. These include data from
regional public transport authorities, local counties, and private entities.

Ecosystem Governance Structure In terms of operations, the members of
the ecosystem can generally be categorized within one of the areas: 1) regional
public transport authorities, 2) private and publicly owned train operators, 3)
national, regional, and local governments, 4) private bus operators, and 5) private
product and service providers. Future plans include integration with related
actors, such as taxi operators and rental-service providers of e.g., cars and bikes.
In terms of the governance structure, Samtraﬁken is positioned in the center
as the platform provider orchestrating and governing the ecosystem (see Fig. 4,
right). Outside of Samtraﬁken in the ﬁrst layer are regional public transport
authorities. As these are formal owners of the platform, they have a strong
inﬂuence on the direction of Traﬁklab. In the second layer are the formal partners
to Samtraﬁken which may include actors with diﬀerent types of operation. The
third layer primarily consists of private product and service providers, while
end-users are positioned in the fourth layer.

Orchestration and Collaboration Close relationships are maintained to re-
gional public transport authorities and partners as these are the primary data
producers but also consumers. The ecosystem at large has the possibility to
report bugs, ask for help, and request and discuss new features, APIs, or data-
sets through an asynchronous, open communication platform. Physical meetings
can also serve a similar purpose as Samtraﬁken frequently hosts hackathons and
meetups related to Traﬁklab.

As with SPES, Samtraﬁken is transitioning to a more open and collaborative
way of engaging with its ecosystem, a need identiﬁed in earlier research [20].
As an example, they are discussing a more formal approach where users can
request and vote on what data sets should be prioritized. In regards to OSS, they
currently have a number of software development kits and example applications
available. Their intention is to develop a new OSS trip planner and share their

10

Johan Lin˚aker and Per Runeson

Table 1. General characteristics of the two ecosystems investigated, JobTech Dev and
Traﬁklab, in terms of their platform provider and keystones, but also in regards to the
data and software provided on their underpinning platforms.

JobTech Dev

Traﬁklab

Platform
provider

A single government agency

A public entity co-owned by multi-
ple public sector organizations

Keystones Organizations with large user bases,

Owners and partners

Data
sources

or valuable assets (e.g., data)

Produced internally
Collected externally
Contributed from third party

OSS

APIs, example applications

Collected externally
Contributed by third party

Example applications, toolkits, li-
braries, frameworks

APIs as OSS along with their internal road-maps for the diﬀerent parts of the
platform. Contributions have been limited to bug reports and feature requests.
Regarding the data, all of the provided data sets originate from data produc-
ers within the ecosystem. Depending on the case, Samtraﬁken may transform
the data to certain standard formats, develop and maintain the necessary APIs,
and provide the necessary infrastructure for data consumers. A challenge with
growing the ecosystem and gaining new data producers is related to standard
formats of the data. For smaller actors, it is an expensive process to transform
the data, and for Samtraﬁken a recognized risk is that data may be destroyed
when transformed between standards. Samtraﬁken is, therefore, developing an
input-portal to enable further actors to share their data on Traﬁklab and to au-
tomate the transformation process. The portal is speciﬁcally intended for actors
in areas related to public transport, such as taxi operators and rental-service
providers.

The input-portal is a result of a long-term investigation conducted by Sam-
traﬁken and its partners into the future potential and needs for public transport-
related OGD. The investigation also rendered in a plan to introduce 12 new data
sets by 2021. Other than helping data producers to transform their data into
diﬀerent standards, Samtraﬁken and its partners within the Traﬁklab ecosystem
also collaborate on the development of new standards when needed. A standard
for tickets and payment transactions was developed in response to diﬃculties
with diﬀerent proprietary solutions not being able to interface with each other.

5 Discussion

JobTech Dev and Traﬁklab present both similar and diﬀerentiating attributes
as OGD ecosystems (see table 1). Considering the type of governance structure,
we observe that JobTech Dev is governed by SPES, a single government agency,
while Traﬁklab is governed by Samtraﬁken, an organization co-owned by all the
Swedish public transport authorities, whom all are situated in the inner layer

Collaboration in Open Government Data Ecosystems

11

of the governance structure (cf. [5]). SPES has the advantage that it potentially
can move quickly but also has the risk that its directive can easily change due to
change in the national government. The latter could be a concern for existing and
new members whether they can trust the direction and stability of the platform
and ecosystem, and thereby if they should invest in platform integrations.

Samtraﬁken, on the other hand, is an investment by several authorities and
provides a somewhat neutral body with which commercial traﬃc operators can
become co-owners or create formal partnerships with. This may be a way to
ensure trust in the platform provider’s commitment and a guarantee for the
long-term stability of the ecosystem. Similarities may be drawn to the role of
foundations as a proxy-organization and neutral home for OSS projects where
actors can collaborate and invest together in a way that beneﬁts them all and
with clear charters stating how the project will be technically governed [5].

X-roads, a governmental OSS project [19], has a centralized governance model,
which can be used for reference. It is clear that they are in control of the ecosys-
tem but at the price of limited contributions from other members. The central
governance actors paid the members for their contributions to evolve the OSS.
Clearly, there is a trade-oﬀ between control and inclination to contribute.

In regards to data sharing, there is also some level of distinction between
the two ecosystems. In JobTech Dev, taxonomy data originate from and is pro-
vided by SPES, job-advertisement originates from a number of organizations and
is collected by SPES, while resume-data is provided on an individual level by
the job-seekers. In Traﬁklab, all data originate from a third party. Samtraﬁken
collects, (in some cases transforms) and provides the data on the Traﬁklab-
platform. The platform’s roadmap includes the development of an input-portal
to enable further third-parties to contribute their data. Both SPES and Sam-
traﬁken thereby show an active role in enabling and incentivizing the members
of the respective ecosystems to share their data, either by collecting the data
or by enabling a self-service function where the member can provide the data
themselves.

Concerning OSS both SPES and Samtraﬁken see the value in developing
complementary and supporting software as OSS, even though outside contri-
butions thus far have been limited for both. This may, however, be subject to
change as both are striving towards adopting a more open and collaborative way
of working and collaborating with their ecosystems (cf. [20,23]). Observations of
the X-roads project may generalize to these contexts as well [19].

Looking at the responsibilities taken on by the platform providers in the
investigated ecosystems, they cover many of the roles as reported in litera-
ture [8, 12]. Besides being data providers, both SPES and Samtraﬁken may be
described as data brokers as they gather, promote, and distribute data from
third-party [8], but also data transformers as the transform data between diﬀer-
ent standards based on ecosystem needs [12]. Another important role is that of
tool providers as they both develop supporting tools, frameworks, and example
applications for their ecosystems [8]. Hence, for the collaboration in OGD ecosys-
tems to function the platform provider is required to perform multiple functions

12

Johan Lin˚aker and Per Runeson

compared to traditional OGD ecosystems where tasks are more divided among
the actors [8, 12]. In contrast, when entering an existing ecosystem, an organiza-
tion may consider taking a peripheral less complex role [20]. This is, however, a
trade-oﬀ between inﬂuence on the platform development and value capture, i.e.,
if the organization’s goals can still be achieved.

As Samtraﬁken started their ecosystem in 2011, and SPES in 2018, the former
is more mature in its role as a platform provider. For example, it has an existing
and active ecosystem with several successful applications and use cases, mecha-
nisms for collecting and enabling actors to share their data, and also practices
for enabling and collaboratively designing open standards for the data. SPES
has been able to catch up rather rapidly however in terms of platform content
due to the dedicated resources, and the existence of both data and software that
could be opened up.

6 Conclusions

This paper explores the collaboration in OGD ecosystems between actors in
terms of sharing and co-development of both OGD, related OSS, and open stan-
dards. We focus on the platform provider’s point of view and explore how these
ecosystems may function in terms of collaboration and governance.

The case studies contrast how the governance structure may diﬀer when the
platform provider represents a single or multiple public sector organizations.
The case studies further highlight the need for the platform provider to take on
an active and multi-functional role in enabling the sharing of data and software
from and between the members of the ecosystem. Responsibilities include the cre-
ation of processes and technical infrastructure, facilitating standard development
and enabling automated transformation between the formats, and co-developing
APIs, complementary tools, frameworks, and example applications as OSS.

We hypothesize that this type of collaboration can extend the potential ben-
eﬁts for the platform provider and the ecosystem, including reduced cost and
accelerated innovation, but also increased adoption and sharing of data. As this
study is limited to exploring the collaboration in two instances of OGD ecosys-
tems, further research is required to validate these hypotheses, create a deeper
understanding, and improve the external validity [22]. Readers should consider
the context of the platform providers and their ecosystems as reported and adopt
an analytical generalization to cases with similar characteristics [22].

Several avenues for future research exist. From a platform provider’s per-
spective, for example, i) what challenges they experience when “opening up”
the development of the platform towards the surrounding ecosystem, and ii)
how the governance and processes for collaborative development should be de-
signed accordingly. From the ecosystem’s perspective, including both keystones
and niche players, iii) what motivates their usage of the platform, sharing of
resources and knowledge, as well as active collaboration on the platform’s devel-
opment, iv) what challenges do they perceive in these regards, and v) how the
collaborative development and governance should be designed to best support

Collaboration in Open Government Data Ecosystems

13

their participation. Further, vi) how do these aspects, as well as dynamics and
inter-relationships between the diﬀerent roles, vary with the up-scaling of the
ecosystems, and also between contexts, as with the two cases in this study.

References

1. Alves, C., Oliveira, J., Jansen, S.: Understanding Governance Mechanisms and
Health in Software Ecosystems: A Systematic Literature Review. In: Hammoudi,
S., ´Smia(cid:32)lek, M., Camp, O., Filipe, J. (eds.) Enterprise Information Systems. pp.
517–542. Springer International Publishing, Cham (2018)

2. Attard, J., Orlandi, F., Scerri, S., Auer, S.: A systematic review of open government

data initiatives. Government Information Quarterly 32(4), 399–418 (2015)

3. Borg, M., Olsson, T., Franke, U., Assar, S.: Digitalization of swedish government
agencies–a perspective through the lens of a software development census. In: 40th
Int. Conference on Software Eng. pp. 37–46. IEEE (2018)

4. Dawes, S.S., Vidiasova, L., Parkhimovich, O.: Planning and designing open gov-

ernment data programs: An ecosystem approach. GIQ 33(1), 15–27 (2016)

5. De Noni, I., Ganzaroli, A., Orsi, L.: The evolution of OSS governance: A dimen-

sional comparative analysis. SJM 29(3), 247–263 (2013)

6. Franco-Bedoya, O., Ameller, D., Costal, D., Franch, X.: Open source software

ecosystems: A Systematic mapping. IST 91, 160 – 185 (2017)

7. Iansiti, M., Levien, R.: The keystone advantage: what the new dynamics of business

ecosystems mean for strategy, innovation, and sustainability. HBP (2004)

8. Immonen, A., Palviainen, M., Ovaska, E.: Requirements of an open data based

business ecosystem. IEEE Access 2, 88–103 (2014)

9. Jansen, S.: Measuring the health of open source software ecosystems: Beyond the
scope of project health. Inf. and Software Technology 56(11), 1508–1519 (2014)

10. Jansen, S.: A focus area maturity model for software ecosystem governance. Infor-

mation and Software Technology 118 (2020)

11. Kitsios, F., Papachristos, N., Kamariotou, M.: Business models for open data
ecosystem: challenges and motivations for entrepreneurship and innovation. In:
19th Conference on Business Informatics. vol. 1, pp. 398–407. IEEE (2017)

12. Lindman, J., Kinnari, T., Rossi, M.: Business roles in the emerging open-data

ecosystem. IEEE Software 33(5), 54–59 (2015)

13. Mhamdia, A.B.H.S.: Performance measurement practices in software ecosystem.
Int. Journal of Productivity and Performance Management 62(5), 514–533 (2013)
14. Munir, H., Wnuk, K., Runeson, P.: Open innovation in software engineering: a
systematic mapping study. Empirical Software Engineering 21(2), 684–723 (2016)
15. Najafabadi, M.M., Luna-Reyes, L.: Open government data ecosystems: A closed-

loop perspective. In: Proc. 50th HICSS (2017)

16. Nakakoji, K., Yamamoto, Y., Nishinaka, Y., Kishida, K., Ye, Y.: Evolution pat-
terns of open-source software systems and communities. In: Proc. int. workshop on
Principles of software evolution. pp. 76–85. ACM, Orlando, Florida (2002)

17. Oliveira, M.I.S., Lima, G.d.F.B., L´oscio, B.F.: Investigations into data ecosystems:
a systematic mapping study. Knowledge and Information Systems pp. 1–42 (2019)
18. Riehle, D.: The single-vendor commercial open course business model. Information

Systems and e-Business Management 10(1), 5–17 (2012)

19. Robles, G., Gamalielsson, J., Lundell, B.: Setting up government 3.0 solutions
based on open source software: The case of x-road. In: International Conference
on Electronic Government. pp. 69–81. Springer (2019)

14

Johan Lin˚aker and Per Runeson

20. Rudmark, D., Hjalmarsson-Jordanius, A.: Harnessing digital ecosystems through
open data-diagnosing the swedish public transport industry. In: European Confer-
ence of Information Systems (ECIS) (2019)

21. Runeson, P.: Open collaborative data – using OSS principles to share data in SW
engineering. In: 41st ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. on Software Eng. (ICSE): New Ideas
and Emerging Results (NIER) track. pp. 25–28. Montreal, Canada (2019)

22. Runeson, P., H¨ost, M., Rainer, A., Regnell, B.: Case Study Research in Software

Engineering – Guidelines and Examples. Wiley (2012)

23. Sieber, R.E., Johnson, P.A.: Civic open data at a crossroads: Dominant models
and current challenges. Government information quarterly 32(3), 308–315 (2015)
24. Susha, I., Janssen, M., Verhulst, S.: Data collaboratives as “bazaars”? a review
of coordination problems and mechanisms to match demand for data with supply.
Transforming Government: People, Process and Policy 11(1), 157–172 (2017)
25. Zuiderwijk, A., Janssen, M., Davis, C.: Innovation with open data: Essential ele-

ments of open data ecosystems. Information Polity 19(1, 2), 17–33 (2014)

