Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

2
2
0
2

g
u
A
3
2

]
x
e
-
p
e
h
[

1
v
6
7
0
1
1
.
8
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

The JADE Experiment at the PETRA e+e−
collider - history, achievements and revival

S. Bethke1* and A. Wagner2*

1Max-Planck-Institute of Physics, F¨ohringer Ring 6, Munich,
80805, Germany.
2DESY, Notkestr. 85, Hamburg, 22607, Germany.

*Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): bethke@mpp.mpg.de;
albrecht.wagner@desy.de;

Abstract

The JADE experiment was one of ﬁve large detector systems tak-
ing data at the electron-positron collider PETRA, from 1979 to 1986,
at e+e− annihilation centre-of-mass energies from 12 to 46.7 GeV.
The forming of the JADE collaboration, the construction of the appa-
ratus, the most prominent physics highlights, and the post-mortem
resurrection and preservation of JADE’s data and software are reviewed.

Contents

1 Introduction

2 Historical environment

3 The JADE detector and collaboration - planning, set-up and

operation
3.1 Planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 Set-Up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2.1 The JADE Detector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2.2 Event Selection and Data Acquisition . . . . . . . . . .
3.2.3 Oﬄine Computing, Data Analysis and Monte Carlo
. . . . . . . . . . .

generation in a time before internet

1

2

3

5
5
7
8
11

13

 
 
 
 
 
 
15
15
16
19

21
22
22
24
27

27
30
31
31
34
35
37

39
39
41
43
45

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

2

CONTENTS

3.3 Operation and Detector Upgrades

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3.1 Early Set-Backs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3.2 Routine Running . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3.3 Detector Upgrades . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4 Physics Highlights

4.2.1

4.1 QCD and Jets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.1.1 The Gluon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jet Physics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.1.2
4.2 Hadronisation Phenomenology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
String Fragmentation and Diﬀerences between Quark-
and Gluon-Jets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.2.2 Charged Particle, Neutral Kaon and Baryon Production
4.3 Electroweak Precision Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.3.1 Total Cross Section . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.3.2 Charge asymmetry in e+e− → µ+µ− . . . . . . . . . . .
4.3.3 Charge asymmetry in e+e− → bb . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.4 Photon Structure Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5 JADE Data preservation and Software Revival

5.1 Motivation and overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.2 Data Preservation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.3 Software Revival
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.4 New Results from Resurrected data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.4.1 New Observables and QCD models: Universal Descrip-
46
tion of Hadronisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.4.2 Measurements of αs and Signature of Asymptotic Freedom 48

6 Summary and closing remarks

49

1 Introduction

JADE was a particle detector system and experiment at the electron-positron
collider PETRA at the DESY laboratory in Hamburg, Germany. It was
designed, constructed and operated by an international collaboration of insti-
tutes from JApan, Deutschland and England [1]. From 1979 to 1986, the
experiment recorded data of electron-positron annihilations at centre-of-mass
energies between 12 and 46.7 GeV.

The detector comprised novel technologies like accurate tracking of charged
particles in the central jet chamber with fast multi-hit electronics, measure-
ment and identiﬁcation of photons, electrons and muons over wide regions of
solid angle, and maximal hermiticity and symmetry of the detector systems.
Scientiﬁc highlight results were the (co-)discovery of the gluon, establishment
of precision jet-physics, tests of Quantum-Chromodynamics, ﬁrst evidence
for the asymptotic freedom of quarks and gluons, establishment of string-
hadronisation, electro-weak precision tests, two-photon physics and searches

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

CONTENTS

3

for New Physics like Super-Symmetry, free quarks and the - at that time still
undiscovered - top-quark.

More than 10 years after close-down of the experiment, the JADE software
and data were revived and rescued to modern storage systems and comput-
ing platforms, showcasing the need for data preservation and re-use in particle
physics and beyond [2]. These post-mortem eﬀorts provided the means for a
second series of PhD-theses and scientiﬁc publications, based on novel analy-
sis methods and improved theoretical calculations and models that were not
available during the life-time of the experiment.

In this article, the history and the development of the JADE experiment,
the revival and preservation of its data and software, and some of its major
scientiﬁc achievements are being reviewed.

2 Historical environment

About 50 years ago, particle physics was boosted by a number of ground-
breaking experimental discoveries and theoretical developments. In 1973, the
discovery of weak neutral currents in neutrino scattering experiments at CERN
in Geneva / Switzerland provided experimental evidence [3] for the validity of
the uniﬁed theory of the electro-weak interaction, the “Standard Model”, that
was developed since the 1960s [4, 5, 6], and was honoured by the Nobel price
for Sheldon Glashow, Abdus Salam and Steven Weinberg in 1979 [7].

In November 1974, a fourth species of quarks, the charm-quark, was dis-
covered by the E598 experiment at Brookhaven National Lab (BNL) in New
York [8], and the SLAC-LBL magnetic detector at the electron-positron accel-
erator SPEAR at the Stanford Linear Accelerator Centre (SLAC) in California
[9]. Called the “November Revolution”, this discovery triggered a series of new
developments in the ﬁeld of particle physics, and earned the Nobel price for
Burton Richter (SLAC) and Samuel Ting (MIT) in 1976 [10].

First evidence for the existence of a third, sequential lepton, the τ -lepton,
was reported in 1975 [11], from data of the SLAC-LBL magnetic detector at
SPEAR, for which Martin L. Perl received the Nobel Prize in 1995 [12].

The symmetry of two doublets of quarks as basic constituents of hadronic
matter did not last very long: in 1977, a narrow resonance observed at Fermilab
close to Chicago revealed the existence of a ﬁfth species of quarks, called the
b-, beauty- or bottom-quark [13].

The theory of

the strong interaction between quarks, Quantum-
Chromodynamics (QCD), started to emerge in the 1960s, and was completed
in the early 1970s by introducing colour octet gluons as carriers of the strong
force [14], by the concepts of asymptotic freedom [15, 16] and of conﬁnement
of quarks, at high and at low energy scales, respectively. Based on QCD, the
formation of observable hadron jets as footprints of quarks and hard gluon
emission was predicted and quantiﬁed [17, 18], paving the way for experimental
veriﬁcations and further possible discoveries.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

4

CONTENTS

During this exciting time of modern particle physics many new projects for
particle colliders were discussed and planned in Europe, the United States, in
Japan and in Russia. At DESY, the German laboratory for particle physics
at Hamburg, the e+e− collider DORIS had been commissioned in 1974, just
after the “November Revolution”, contributing with the observation of higher
mass excitations of the newly discovered J/Ψ charm-quark-antiquark states.
In 1973, during a meeting of the European Committee for Future Acceler-
ators, ECFA, about long-term plans for new accelerators in Europe it emerged
that DESY, the Rutherford Appleton Laboratory (then called RHEL) in the
UK, and the INFN laboratory in Frascati/Italy considered construction of a
large e+e− storage ring. There was consensus that only one such collider should
be built in Europe. In 1975 the Administrative Council of DESY concluded
that the plan of an electron-positron storage ring for energies around 20 GeV
was scientiﬁcally very well founded, and that DESY oﬀered the best conditions
in Europe for the realisation of such a project, since the existing experimental
facilities would be fully used. DESY was asked by the German Government to
continue its eﬀorts to secure international scientiﬁc and ﬁnancial support and
to prepare for the international use of the project.

Intense negotiations of the DESY Director Herwig Schopper with the
German government led to the approval of the Positron-Electron-Tandem-
Ring-Anlage at DESY, PETRA [19], already in the fall of 1975. The foundation
for experiments at the PETRA e+e− collider was laid at the Discussion Meet-
ing on PETRA Experiments, held at Frascati/Italy from March 1 to 5, 1976
[20]. At this meeting, presentations about the physics goals, technical require-
ments and proposals for experimental setups were given and discussed, and
ﬁrst steps to form collaborations for experiments at PETRA were taken.

Under the leadership of Gustaf-Adolph Voss, the Director of Accelerators,
who already had led the design eﬀorts, construction of PETRA began in 1976,
and was completed in 1978. First stored beams were established in July 1978,
six months ahead of the initial planning. The initial experiments operating at
the 4 collision regions of PETRA were the JADE [21], Mark-J [22], PLUTO [24]
and TASSO [23] detectors. PLUTO had already operated [25] at the precursor
storage ring DORIS, and was replaced at PETRA in March 1980 by the newly
built CELLO detector [26].

The timeline of PETRA as e+e− storage ring and collider is summarised

in Table 1.

After its shutdown as particle collider in November 1986, PETRA came
back to life in 1990 as PETRA-II, where it served as pre-accelerator for the
electron-proton collider HERA until 2007. From 1995 PETRA-II also operated
as synchrotron radiation source, and from 2007 to 2009 was converted into a
highly brillant X-ray source, PETRA-III.

With PETRA and four large experimental setups starting to operate in
1979, DESY became a nationally funded, yet internationally used research lab-
oratory in the ﬁeld of particle physics. Fig. 1 schematically shows the PETRA
collider, with its 4 experimental halls and experiment sites.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

CONTENTS

5

Table 1 Timeline of the e+e− storage ring PETRA

Date

Event

1974

September:

1975
Fall :
1976 March 1-5:

Spring:

August:
October:

February:
July:
September:
October:
January:
April 26:

1977
1978

1979

November:

1983
1984 March:
1986 November 3:

proposal for an e+e− storage ring of 2304 m circumference,
with beam energies Eb up to 19 GeV
and luminosity up to 1.2 × 1032 cm−2 s−1
approval by federal government
discussion meeting on PETRA experiments, Frascati (Italy)
start of PETRA construction; formation of PETRA Research
Committee (PRC); call for experimental proposals
12 experimental proposals received
5 proposals recommended for approval (CELLO, JADE,
Mark-J, PLUTO, TASSO)
PETRA magnet series production started
early completion of PETRA, start of operation
ﬁrst e+e− collisions
Mark-J, PLUTO, TASSO detectors moved into beam
ﬁrst experimental results; JADE detector moved into beam
oﬃcial inauguration of PETRA with presence of the
President of the Federal Republic of Germany, Walter Scheel
Eb up to 19 GeV
Energy upgrade: Eb up to 22 GeV
maximum Eb of 23.390 GeV
ﬁnal shutdown of PETRA and experiments

3 The JADE detector and collaboration -

planning, set-up and operation

3.1 Planning

The initial founders of the JADE collaboration were Joachim Heintze, Profes-
sor at the Physikalisches Institut of Heidelberg University, Masatoshi Koshiba,
Professor at Tokyo University, and Shuji Orito, scientist at the Max-Planck-
Institute for Physics at Munich and later head of the newly setup Laboratory
of International Collaboration on Elementary Particle Physics (LICEPP) at
Tokyo University.

At Frascati, Heintze, at that time spokesperson of the DESY-Heidelberg
NaI Lead Glass detector operating at the DORIS storage ring at DESY,
presented a talk on “Ideas how to use the DESY-Heidelberg Equipment at
PETRA”, and pointed out the importance to measure as many parameters
as possible of all particles emerging from the e+e− annihilation processes.
Orito, at that time member of the DASP experiment at DORIS, presented “A
4π Detector with good Electron and Muon Identiﬁcation”, and also stressed
the importance of obtaining the most complete and precise information on
the kinematics of PETRA collision events. Furthermore, Robin Marshall from
Daresbury Lab (UK) reported ideas on “A Magnetic Detector with Lepton
and Photon Identiﬁcation”, and Wulfrin Bartel from DESY and the Univer-
sity of Hamburg, like Heintze member of the DESY-Heidelberg experiment,
presented plans for an “Electron-Hadron Calorimeter for PETRA”.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

6

CONTENTS

Fig. 1 PETRA and its 4 experimental halls on the DESY site (dash-dotted boundary).

As these proposals were based on the same basic principles it was natural
that Heintze, Orito, Marshall, Bartel and colleagues joined forces and proposed
a new magnetic detector to be operated at PETRA, with maximum sensitivity
for measuring the parameters of leptons and hadrons over (close to) the full
solid angle. Heintze and Orito also involved Rolf Felst, senior scientist at DESY
and head of the DESY F22 group, and member of DASP as well.

The initial plan included a high resolution detector for charged particles
within a magnetic coil of 30 cm radius - basically following the parameters
of the DESY-Heidelberg experiment. Rolf Felst and Dieter Cords suggested a
coil radius of at least 1 m. Joachim Heintze and his group, being in charge
for construction of the tracking chamber, took up this proposal - which later
proved to be an essential decision for the scientiﬁc success of the detector.

The groups of Heidelberg, DESY and Tokyo were joined by groups from
Daresbury Lab, from University of Lancaster and from the University of
Manchester, with Paul Murphy of Manchester University being the leading
and most inﬂuential person of the English groups. Together, they set up the
oﬃcial “JADE - Proposal for a Compact Magnetic Detector at PETRA” [27],
which was submitted to the DESY management by August 1976. The name of

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

CONTENTS

7

the collaboration and experiment was derived from the country names of the
founding institutes: JApan - Deutschland - England.

The proposal was signed by 48 authors, including 11 graduate students.
The abstract provides a concise summary of the relevant key features and
scientiﬁc goals of the experiment:

We propose an experiment which will be ready to take data from the ﬁrst
colliding beams at PETRA. The apparatus consists essentially of a system of
cylindrical drift chambers placed inside a thin normal conducting solenoid. A
modular array of leadglass shower counters surrounds the coil and beyond this
we have a muon ﬁlter system. A small angle double tagging system is provided
as a luminosity monitor and for two photon physics.

Using this apparatus we intend initially to explore the following physics:

1. Total annihilation cross section e+e− → hadrons.
2. Search for new particles by detecting weak decays to e± or µ±
3. Check for QED processes at high momentum transfers and search for neutral

weak current eﬀects in e+e− → µ+µ− and e+e− → hadrons.

4. Study of hadronic ﬁnal states.
5. Survey of two photon initiated reactions.

Rolf Felst was elected as spokesperson of the JADE collaboration - a posi-
tion he held until the end of the experiment in 1986. The representatives of the
groups signing the proposal were Robin Marshall (UK groups), Wulfrin Bar-
tel (DESY and Hamburg University), Joachim Heintze (Heidelberg) and Shoji
Orito (Tokyo). In October 1976, the proposal was recommended for approval
by the PETRA Research Council, PRC.

The participation of Daresbury Lab later changed over to the Appleton
High Energy Laboratory (now Rutherford Appleton Laboratory). In spring
1984, the group around Gus Zorn from University of Maryland, USA, joined
the collaboration1.

The timeline of the JADE experiment, from its planning in early 1976 to
its shutdown at the end of 1986, and its revival in the late 1990s and beyond,
is summarised in Table 2.

3.2 Set-Up

Construction of the detector started right after approval of the project in
October 1976. Only 2.5 years later, in January 1979, the JADE detector, fully
completed, was moved into the beam in the North-West hall of PETRA . This
time span seems amazingly short from today’s perspective, especially as the
compact detector system - about 8 m long, 6.5 m high and 7 m wide, see Fig. 2
- exhibited features and technologies that were novel and trendsetting at that
time.

1At that time, the “A” in “JADE” was unoﬃcially redirected to the new American group, such

that each collaborating nation was still represented by one letter of the collaboration’s name.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

8

CONTENTS

Table 2 Timeline of the JADE experiment at the e+e− storage ring PETRA (PRC:
PETRA Research Council; FADC: Flash Analogue-to-Digital Converter).

Phase

Date

Event

planning
and
construction

installation
and
start-up

upgrades

1976 March 1-5

August
October

February
March
March 26
April 1
June
July 31
August 23

1979

1981
1982
1984
1985

discussion meeting on PETRA experiments, Frascati (Italy)
JADE proposal submitted to DESY management
JADE proposal recommended for approval by PRC

JADE detector moved into beam
ﬁrst data recorded (single e−-beam, Ebeam = 11.3 GeV)
fatal beam loss and damage of tracking chamber
removal of detector from the beam and tracker repair
reinstallation and data taking
very ﬁrst results presented to PRC by J. Heintze
ﬁrst results and evidence for the observation of the gluon
presented at 9th Int. Symp. on Lepton/Photon
Interactions at High Energies, Batavia, by S. Orito

mini-beta quadrupoles and reconﬁgured forward detectors
new lead-glass counters in central barrel
installation of vertex chamber and z-chamber
FADC upgrade of jetchamber read-out

shutdown

1986 Nov. 3
1991

shutdown of PETRA and the JADE experiment
phasing-out of JADE data analyses

data
preservation
and
revival

1996
1997
1997
2009 August 22
2011

- 2012

2022

data sets rescued and copied to modern data carriers
revival of JADE software
new data analyses and scientiﬁc publications
JADE revival and collaboration meeting
digitisation and archiving of shift crew logbooks (1979
-1986), collaboration meeting protocols and internal notes
release of JADE data and software for public access and
usage, in the framework of the CERN Open Data portal.

3.2.1 The JADE Detector

The detector covered 97 % and 90 % of the full solid angle for detecting charged
particles and photons, respectively [21]. A 3.5 m long solenoidal coil, 2 m in
diameter and with a 7 cm thin aluminum conductor, produced a magnetic
ﬁeld of 0.5 Tesla parallel to the electron/positron beam axis. An array of 24
scintillators surrounded the beam pipe, and 42 time-of-ﬂight-counters were
mounted immediately inside the coil.

A cylindrical, novel type of drift chamber, the “jet chamber” [28], was
located inside the magnet volume, to accurately measure the tracks of charged
particles that emerge from the e+e− interaction point in the beam pipe and
centre of the detector. A cylindrical array of lead-glass shower counters was
arranged outside of the magnet coil, consisting of 2520 lead glass blocks, indi-
vidually calibrated, reaching an energy resolution for large angle Bhabha events
(e+e− → e+e−) of σE/E = 4%/
E + 1.5%.

√

Two ﬂat iron endcaps with 96 lead glass blocks on each inner side served
as part of the magnet return yoke, closed the cylinder and completed the lead
glass system to a total coverage of 90% of the solid angle. The magnet return

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

CONTENTS

9

Fig. 2 The JADE detector in its 1979 conﬁguration.

yoke surrounded the lead glass system and also served as the ﬁrst layer of
the muon ﬁlter, followed by further layers consisting of iron loaded concrete,
interspersed by 4 or 5 layers of drift chambers covering 92% of the solid angle.
Two small detectors, consisting of scintillators, drift chambers and lead-
glass modules, recorded electrons and positrons at small polar angles (mea-
sured with respect to the direction of the incoming positron beam), providing
online measurement of the luminosity of the colliding beams, and tagging two-
photon processes (e+e− → e+e−+ hadrons). For a concise description of all
components of the JADE detector, see also [29].

The jet chamber, together with the lead-glass calorimeter, was the key
component enabling JADE’s scientiﬁc success. Developed, constructed and
commissioned by the Heidelberg group around Heintze, it consisted of 96 drift
cells, arranged in 3 concentric rings around and parallel to the beampipe, each
containing 16 sense wires and 19 potential wires plus a system of ﬁeld gener-
ating electrodes deﬁning linear drift spaces up to 8 cm long, see Fig. 3. The
chambers were contained in a pressure vessel, 3m long and 1.8m in diameter,
ﬁlled with a gas mixture of Argon, Methane and Isobutane at 4 atm.

Charged particles, emerging from the beam collision point and travers-
ing the jet chamber, ionise the gas along their curved2 trajectory, leading to
a 3-dimensional measurement of up to 48 space-points for each track. The
z-coordinate along the beam direction was determined by charge division,
the ratio of signal amplitudes read-out on both ends of the sense wire; the

2through the magnetic ﬁeld

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

10

CONTENTS

Fig. 3 Cross section through two of the 24 sectors of the jet-chamber.

radial distance r to the beam line was given by the location of the sense
wire, corrected for eﬀects of the Lorentz force on the drifting electrons; the
azimuthal position φ in the plane perpendicular to the beamline was given by
the drift-time and hence the distance to the sense wire, whereby the left-right
ambiguity was resolved by alternating displacements of the wire positions by
±150µm. The spacial resolutions obtained were σrφ = 180µm (110µm after the
electronics upgrade to Flash ADCs, see Section 3.3.3) and σz = 16 − 32 mm.
The electronics for readout and digitisation of data from the jet cham-
ber also was custom-made, developed and built by the Heidelberg group [30],
comprising pre-ampliﬁers at both ends of each sense wire, sitting on the outer
side of the end ﬂanges of the pressure vessel, NIM-type3 ampliﬁer/discrimina-
tor/integrators generating pulse height “right”, pulse height “left” and time
signals for each sense wire, followed by CAMAC-type4 time and amplitude
digitisers with multiple hit capacity, see Fig. 4. The system was able to pro-
cess up to 8 hits per signal wire with a double pulse resolution down to 70 ns,
corresponding to 3.5 mm in space at a drift velocity of 5 cm/µs. The charge
measurement was performed using gated integrators, fast analog memories and
a 12-bit multiplexer-ADC system (one per 8 wires). With this system, three-
dimensional track coordinates and the energy loss of the particles passing the
detector could be obtained.

3Nuclear Instrumentation Module (NIM) standard, deﬁning mechanical and electrical speciﬁ-

cations for electronics modules used in experimental particle and nuclear physics[31].

4Computer-Aided Measurement And Control (CAMAC), a modular crate electronics and bus

standard for data acquisition and control [31].

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

CONTENTS

11

Fig. 4 Multihit electronics of the JADE jet chamber with analog pulse discrimination and
charge integration.

Both the concept and realisation of the jet chamber and its associated
multi-hit readout electronics were novel developments at that time, generat-
ing high expectations for its capabilities and performance. While this concept
raised critical scepticism in the early phase of planning and approval,
it
contributed in a major way to the scientiﬁc success of JADE.

3.2.2 Event Selection and Data Acquisition

The two electron- and two counter-rotating positron-bunches crossed each
other, at each of the four interaction points of PETRA, every 4 µs, i.e. at a
rate of 250 kHz. The JADE trigger system reduced this rate to a few collision
events per second which were read out and stored for physics analyses.

The trigger was organised in three levels, T1 to T3. The ﬁrst level (T1) was
based on fast analog signals from the scintillators and the lead glass counters,

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

12

CONTENTS

Fig. 5 The JADE data acqusition system (JDAS) [32].

which were available about 350 ns after the beam crossing. Based on certain
requirements of conﬁgurations or energy sums, collision events were immedi-
ately rejected, or postponed to the next level (T2), or immediately accepted
for read-out. Rejection at this stage allowed to reset the trigger and read-out
system, without causing dead-time.

The level 2 trigger was based on the data of the tracking chamber and a
fast track-ﬁnding logic, which were available about 2 µs after beam-crossing.
Until 1982, rejection by T2 caused the loss of the next bunch crossing because
of the time needed to reset the jet chamber electronics. From 1982, this was
changed such that a T2-reject did not generate extra dead-time.

Finally, trigger level 3 used signals from the muon counters which were
available about 5 µs after beam-crossing. Events accepted at any stage of T1
to T3 initiated an interrupt signal to the online computers which read out the
digitised event information.

The average amount of data read out for a typical e+e− collision event
was 200 to 3500 16-bit words, ocuring at a trigger rate between 2 and 6 Hz,
depending on the PETRA beam conditions. Multihadronic events, at a rate
of a few per hour, typically comprised 4000 to 8000 words. In the initial phase
of the experiment, the data were written on magnetic tapes, which were then
carried over to the DESY main frame computer centre for further processing
and data analysis. Later, data were directly transferred to the computing centre
using a link between the JADE online computer and DESY’s IBM main frame.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

CONTENTS

13

Eﬃcient operation and control of a complex detector like JADE required
a maximum of on-line computing power, memory and data handling capacity.
At the time of JADE operation, computing power as well as memory capacity
was very limited, many orders of magnitude less than available today. The
choice made for the JADE experiment was a NORD-10s/50 dual processor
from Norsk-Data, Norway, and a Plessey MIPROC-16 microprocessor.

The NORD-10s was a general purpose 16-bit minicomputer for time-
sharing applications and real-time multiprogram systems. The CPU consisted
of a total of 24 printed circuit boards, and its speed was 260 ns per micro-
instruction [33], corresponding to a CPU clock speed of 3.8 MHz. The memory
management system allowed a 16-bit virtual word address to be mapped into
an 18-bit physical address, so that the maximum memory available to a user
program was 128 kbytes and the maximum physical memory was 512 kbytes.
In addition the memory management system swapped 2 kbyte pages to and
from a 66 Mbyte disc, thereby extending the memory size “almost indeﬁnitely”
[34].

The NORD-10s was equipped with two 66 Mbyte disc units, two ﬂoppy-disc
units, one card reader, a 1600 b.p.i. magnetic tape unit, ten terminal drivers
and two external bus drivers (one for CAMAC I/O and the other for a crate
that provided the link to the DESY IBM mainframe computer), a colour TV
screen and a Gould black-and-white printer/plotter.

The NORD-50 was a 32-bit single-program computer which was about
a factor of 3 faster than the NORD-10. It controlled no peripherals at all
and needed a NORD-10 which drove it via a set of registers. The particular
advantage of the NORD-10s/50 system was that the two processors could
access a common part of a multiport memory and were not simply linked by
I/O channels.

For digitising the data and controlling the electronics for the JADE exper-
iment, 40 CAMAC crates were interfaced to the NORD-10s. The MIPROC-16
was used for part of the online event ﬁltering scheme. The NORD-50 was used
for a single program which performed event validation, analysis and monitor-
ing, including histogram ﬁlling [32]. Several microprocessors operated within
individual crates and for various purposes. The organisation of the tasks and
buﬀers of the JADE Data Acqusition System (JDAS) is shown in Fig. 5.

3.2.3 Oﬄine Computing, Data Analysis and Monte Carlo

generation in a time before internet

At the end of the 1970s, the central computer at DESY was based on a system
of two IBM 370-168 mainframes that were installed in 1975, each with a main
core memory of 3 MByte5. The system was upgraded in 1979 by the purchase
of an additional mainframe IBM 370-3033, which basically doubled the total

5The main memory was already based on silicon technology, in contrast to magnetic-core mem-
ory that was the predominant form of random-access computer memory before 1975. 1975 also
marked the transition from punch-card programming to a terminal based time-sharing system
(TSO). This transition happened slowly and was completed at DESY by 1979.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

14

CONTENTS

available CPU power. The 3033 provided a cycle time of 58 ns, equivalent to
a CPU clock speed of 17.2 MHz.

During data taking, the JADE raw data were transferred to the DESY
computing centre using a fast internal link, and written on machine-room tapes
with a capacity of 160 MB each (“REFORM” data sets). These data were then
further processed, calibrated, reduced, and pre-analysed oﬀ-line on the IBM
mainframe, and the resulting data ﬁles, called “REDUCn”, with n=1 being the
main stream for all selected data, and n=2 for a special selection with slightly
varied selection criteria better adopted to the needs of two-photon physics,
were again written to machine room tapes.

Due to the absence of the internet or any of its precursors, the data basically
resided at DESY, and physics analyses proceeded mainly on the DESY IBM
mainframe. Also the generation of Monte-Carlo based event samples, required
for the study and correction for limited detector response and resolution, was
performed on the DESY IBM mainframe. As all the PETRA experiments
processed their data in a similar way, the DESY computing system was almost
always operated and used at its limits, and there was need for signiﬁcantly
more computing resources than available at DESY, e.g. for reprocessing of all
data sets, or for suﬃciently large statistics and variants of MC production. This
was a major bottleneck requiring innovative, farsighted and collegial usage of
the available computing resources.

There were, however, occasions of accessing and using signiﬁcant additional
oﬀ-line computing resources for JADE. The Tokyo group of JADE faced the
problem that many of their students needed to perform and ﬁnalise their data
analyses back at Tokyo, due to limited resources for student’s travels and
staying abroad. The group therefore acquired and installed a FACOM M190
mainframe system, a clone of and thus compatible to the IBM 370, at their
lab at Tokyo. That computer was equipped with a copy of the DESY software
system, such that the JADE software and all computing jobs at this machine
ran exactly like at DESY, without further modiﬁcations and adjustments.
Being well-equipped with local computing power, this also allowed for addi-
tional reprocessing runs of the data, and for extensive MC event generation.
The in- and output-data, however, always had to be transferred by sending
large batches of magnetic tapes (c.f. Fig. 22), between Tokyo and DESY.

Another occasion for using signiﬁcant extra oﬀ-line computing resources
was procured by the Heidelberg group: The mainframe computer of the Uni-
versity of Heidelberg, an IBM 3081 - a successor of the IBM 370 series - at that
time was routinely switched oﬀ during week-ends, due to low user demands
and also for saving resources. In 1983, the JADE group at Heidelberg suc-
ceeded to obtain permission for exclusive usage of the entire computing centre
over week-ends, free of charge, but supplying its own team of trained (student)

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

CONTENTS

15

operators for that time, for mounting in- and output tapes but also for assur-
ing smooth operation of the hard- and software systems, and for switching on
and oﬀ the computer centre for these special weekend operations6.

3.3 Operation and Detector Upgrades

In spite of the very short time for planning, construction and commissioning,
the detector performed as expected right after its completion and installation
in February 1979.

3.3.1 Early Set-Backs

However, already on March 26 1979, a fatal loss of the PETRA beam right into
the detector resulted in major damage of the jet chamber, c.f. Table 2. The
beam loss was caused by a trip of part the magnet system due to a failure of
the cooling water supply. The electrons of the PETRA beam hit the beampipe
close to the JADE detector, producing showers of energetic particles traversing
the jet chamber, ionising the gas and causing major distortions of the electric
ﬁeld in the drift chamber. This in turn lead to large oscillations of the anode
signal wires, some of which would contact the neighbouring cathode wires. Due
to a too large capacity of the decoupling capacitors in the high-voltage supply
for the electric ﬁelds inside the chamber, some of the 50 µm thin sense wires
therefore melted when making contact with the cathode wires.

The scientists on duty at this night shift of March 26 analysed the situation
and found that in more than half of the jet chamber cells at least one wire was
broken and that these cells could no longer be operated.7

Rapid decisions and actions were taken in order to repair the damaged jet
chamber. On April 1st 1979, within 24 hours the JADE detector was rolled
out of the beam and the beam vacuum was reestablished. The pressure vessel
with the jet chamber was removed from the surrounding detector, carefully
packed into a large truck and driven back to the Physics Institute of University
of Heidelberg, where the jet chamber had been built and completed just few
months before. Disassembly of the chamber, its repair, re-assembly, transport
back to DESY, re-installion and commissioning at DESY took little more than
2 months, such that the JADE detector started to take collision data again in
June 1979.

JADE had to catch up with its competitor experiments at PETRA, MARK-
J, TASSO and PLUTO, who took their ﬁrst data during JADE’s repair

6The installation of the JADE (and DESY) software, however, was diﬃcult, due to a diﬀerent
system software on the 3081, and ﬁnally was not successfully completed. Instead, load-modules of
programs being produced on the DESY mainframe proofed to run without problems on the 3081,
such that productions and generations that did not need much user intervention and adjustments
could formidably run on the 3081. Monitoring and steering of this production at Heidelberg was
performed using an early version IBM-PC at DESY, with an acoustic-coupled phone connection to
the Heidelberg mainframe with 800 baud transfer speed. However, the transfer of in- and output
data, and of the load modules, had to be arranged via large magnetic tapes, being transported by
scientists travelling between Hamburg and Heidelberg by train.

7They must have been shocked as the only thing they noted in the experiment’s log book was:

6:40 Strahl verloren (beam lost) END.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

16

CONTENTS

shutdown. The very ﬁrst results obtained in this previously unexplored energy
range showed that the total hadronic cross section, a measure for the num-
ber of quark generations, showed no evidence for the hypothetical top-quark.
However, these early data already exhibited ﬁrst signs for the major discovery
to be made at PETRA, the gluon - see Section 4 below.

Data taking of JADE started right after re-installation and commissioning
of the detector, and very ﬁrst analysis results of these early JADE data were
already presented at the PRC8 meeting on July 31 1979 by Joachim Heintze,
and at the 9th International Symposium on Lepton-Photon Interactions at
High Energies, held at Fermilab / Batavia (USA) in August 23-28, 1979, in a
talk given by Shuji Orito [36].

In the course of 1980 running, a total of 9 out of the 96 drift cells of the
central jet chamber developed HV-shortages, so that these had to be taken out
of HV-supply and data-readout (“dead cells”). As a consequence, the detector
was again opened and the jet chamber vessel removed and driven to Heidelberg
for repair, in the winter shutdown of PETRA of 1980/1981. The repair work
was completed during the scheduled shutdown.9

3.3.2 Routine Running

√

The JADE detector recorded e+e− collision data from June 1979 to November
1986, when PETRA was ﬁnally shut down. The variation of the centre-of-mass
energy
s as a function of time is summarised in Fig. 6, and the integrated
luminosity recorded at the diﬀerent energies is given in Fig. 7. The total
integrated luminosity summed up to 216 pb−1.

In the ﬁrst three years of running, PETRA and the experiments operated
in 24/7 mode for typically few weeks in a row, intercepted by short periods of
shut-down for maintenance and upgrades of the accelerator and the detectors.
During the last years of operation, extended data runs lasting several months
became common routine.

Detector operation during data-taking required two persons being on shift
in the JADE control room, controlling and steering the performance of detec-
tor hardware, data taking and data ﬂow, performing small repairs and ﬁxes,
informing and calling experts in case of major problems and happenings, and
coordinating with the other experiments and the PETRA control room (PKR),
Shifts were arranged in three 8-hours shifts throughout the day, from 0:00
to 8:00, from 8:00 to 16:00 and from 16:00 o’clock to midnight. In addition,
one expert for each of the major detector subsystems was assigned to be on-
call for cases of major problems, typically for periods of 24 hours, adding up
to a total of 12-15 people being in charge and responsible for operation of
JADE every day. During times of data taking, these were major challenges for

8PETRA Research Committee; later generalised to Physics Research Committee
9The action was risky due to deep-winter conditions on the way to and from Heidelberg, two
600 km drives through deep snow and the need to keep the detector at temperatures safely above
15C at all times. In addition, it was a challenge to manage disassembly, repair, assembly and
commissioning during the short available time over the holidays. Being experienced with this kind
of emergency actions, the Heidelberg crew succeeded to deliver and re-install a fully functional jet
chamber in time again.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

CONTENTS

17

Fig. 6 e+e− centre of mass energies of data taken as function of time. Major repairs and
upgrades of the JADE detector are indicated.

a collaboration consisting, at any given time between 1979 and 1986, of 50 to
60 people, who partly were based at their home institutions rather than at
DESY.

The ﬁrst data collected at run start in 1979 were at c.m. energies around
30 GeV and concentrated around 35 GeV in the course of the end of 1979 to
late 1982, with short interceptions at 22 and at 14 GeV in 1981.

From late 1982 to the middle of 1984, the c.m. energy of PETRA was
gradually increased, in steps of 30 MeV, from 35 GeV up to PETRA’s maxi-
mum achieved energy of 46.78 GeV. At each energy point, about 200nb−1 were
accumulated, on average, for each of the four experiments. This was the excit-
ing time of scanning for the top-quark, the predicted but yet undiscovered 6th
quark, whose mass was expected, at that time, to be about 20 GeV, and the
tt-ground state to have a mass between 36.8 and 38 GeV, see e.g. [37].10

A just-for-fun plot of the normalised total hadronic cross section, produced
on-line on 21 December 1982, at the end of the 1982 energy scan, stopping

10In order to demonstrate the high levels of expectation and of motivation at that time, we
reproduce some of the comments made and documented in minutes of the weekly JADE meetings,
and in the online logbooks (scanned versions available at [38]):
JADE wants to ﬁnd top (be-)for Xmas! (minutes of JADE meeting on 18 November 1982)
Main worry is now that we are running already above tt ground state, since Harald Fritzsch
predicts M 1s
tt = 36, 9 ± 0.1 GeV . The top scan reached 38.4 GeV - Oh boy! (minutes of JADE
meeting on 16 December1982)

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

18

CONTENTS

Fig. 7 Integrated luminosity collected by JADE as a function of the centre of mass energy.

at 39,5 GeV c.m. energy, including hand-drawn expectations for the lowest tt
bound states according to [37], is reproduced in Fig. 8.11

After the disillusion of not ﬁnding the top-quark by the middle of 1984,
the PETRA experiments and the PRC decided to run at c.m. energies around
44 GeV for the rest of 1984 and the entire 1985, avoiding the large drop of
machine luminosity at the highest achievable energies reached during the scan.
In order to signiﬁcantly test QCD and its running coupling strength, JADE
proposed to also collect high statistics at lower c.m. energies like 22 GeV, where
only a limited amount of data had been collected in 1981. Instead, the decision
was to operate PETRA at 35 GeV during its ﬁnal year of 1986, to make use
of the best performance and highest luminosity, thus collecting a maximum of
data.

PETRA and the experiments were shut down in the early morning hours
of November 3, 1986, after 8 years of successful operation. This gave rise to the
earliest JADE collaboration meeting ever, starting at 6 o’clock in the morning,
at the detector in the PETRA North-West experimental hall, with more than
40 Jadites present, see Fig. 9, and a formidable breakfast including a French
Champagne endowed and served by Joachim Heintze.

11Hurrah - das top ist daaaa! Und morgen kommt der Minister (engl.: Hurrah - the top
(quark) is here! And tomorrow the minister will come) was another outbreak of excitement, in
April 1984, noted in the online logbook, based on a (statistically not really signiﬁcant) ﬂuctuation
of R observed at the highest PETRA energy of 46,78 GeV.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

CONTENTS

19

Fig. 8 Online version of the “R-plot”, the normalised hadronic cross section as function of
the c.m. energy, from 36 to 39.5 GeV, as plotted on 21 December, at the end of the 1982
energy scan to search for the top quark (JADE online logbook #10, page 73 [38]). Drawn-in
by hand is a sketch of the expectation for the ground state and higher tt resonances according
to a then actual theoretical prediction. The expectation for R in case of 5 quark ﬂavors,
without the top-quark, is 3.8, and for 6 quarks, including the top-quark in the continuum,
about 5.2. The horizontal line at R = 4 is drawn to guide the eye.

3.3.3 Detector Upgrades

During its eight years of active lifetime, the JADE detector was subject to
several major repairs, and also to a number of signiﬁcant upgrades of the
detector hardware. Major disassemblies of the detector and repairs of the cen-
tral jet chamber during the ﬁrst two years of running were already reported
in Section 3.3.1. From 1981 on, the detector - in its conﬁguration as described
in Section 3.2.1 - received several major upgrades, to improve the detector
performance and modernise some technologies.
• In March 1981, the beam focussing of PETRA was reconﬁgured to the new,
so-called mini-beta scheme, which required the installation of new focussing
quadrupoles on both sides of and as close as possible to the beam interaction
region, for all experiments. In the case of JADE, these quadrupoles replaced
the previous compensation magnets and the forward-detectors, c.f. items
13 and 14 in Figure 2. With the new scheme, no compensation magnets to
counter balance the eﬀects of the JADE solenoidal magnetic ﬁeld on the
beam dynamics were necessary any more; however new forward detectors

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

20

CONTENTS

Fig. 9 JADE collaborators present at the farewell party on the occasion of the shutdown
of PETRA and its experiments, in the early morning of November 3, 1986 (JADE online
logbook # 21, page 77 [38]).

and a new layout of the beam-pipe had to be designed and installed inside
the JADE detector. The stronger focussing of the mini-beta-scheme resulted
in an increase of the luminosity, i.e. the number of collision events per second,
by up to a factor of three, and thus was instrumental for the overall scientiﬁc
success of the PETRA experiments.

• In the winter shutdown of 1982/83, the central 20% of lead-glass counters in
the barrel region of the electromagnetic calorimeter were replaced by coun-
ters of higher density (Schott SF6), exhibiting 15.7 radiation lengths instead
of the 12.5 radiation lengths of the other (Schott SF5) barrel counters.
• In 1984, a high resolution vertex chamber with Flash-ADC (FADC) readout
was installed, replacing the beam pipe scintillation counters and extending
the measurement of charged particle trajectories by the central jet chamber
to smaller radii [39]. This upgrade of the tracking system improved the
accuracy of the track extrapolation to the main interaction point by more
than a factor of 2, and made precise measurements of the lifetimes of b-
quarks and τ -leptons possible.

• Also in 1984, a new z-chamber was installed. It was mounted onto the outer
shell of the jet chamber pressure vessel, with sense wires “wrapped” around
the central tracking detector, and their sensitive drift direction parallel to
the e+e− beam, providing a precise determination of the z-coordinate of

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

CONTENTS

21

tracks at large distance from the beam. The installation of the z-chamber
required a major operation to remove the jet chamber pressure vessel and
to cut it from its high-pressure gas supply.

• Finally, during the winter shutdown of 1985/86, only one year before the end
of PETRA e+e− collider operation, the initial multi-hit readout of the jet
chamber was replaced by a 100 MHz Flash-ADC system with microprocessor
pulse analysis and readout [40, 41]. This new system improved the spatial
resolution of the central jet chamber from 170 to 110 µm, and the double
track resolution from 7 to 2 mm. This system provided the test-bed for the
tracking chamber readout at the next generation of e+e− experiments, in
particular the OPAL detector at the LEP collider at CERN which in many
respects can be considered a successor of JADE.

4 Physics Highlights

The analysis of JADE data and publication of scientiﬁc results proceeded in
two phases. The ﬁrst lasted from 1979 to 1991 and so came to an end about 5
years after the end of data taking. The second phase started in 1997 with the
revival of the JADE data, followed by more analyses, as described in Section 5.
Studies of the ﬁrst phase covered a broad range of particle physics topics,
predominantly in the ﬁelds of Strong Interactions and hadron production, of
the Electro-Weak Standard Model, of two photon interactions, of searches for
the top-quark as well as searches for new physics beyond the Standard Model.
In total, 74 publications were issued in peer-reviewed scientiﬁc journals.

To date - more than 35 years after the end of data taking - these pub-
lications received more than 6800 citations, i.e. 92 citations per publication
on average, and an h-index of 44 [42]. Two of these [43, 44], with 970 and
653 citations, respectively, occupy positions number one and four of the most
cited papers of all PETRA experiments. Both these JADE papers pioneered
jet physics and the experimental veriﬁcation of Asymptotic Freedom of quarks
and gluons, a key-feature of Quantum Chromodynamics.

The ﬁrst publications on the discovery of the gluon, by the TASSO [45]
and the Mark-J [46] collaborations, score second and third on the list of most
cited PETRA publications, followed by the ones from PLUTO [47] and from
JADE [48] on positions 6 and 7, respectively.

In the following subsections, some of the physics highlights of JADE will
be reviewed in more detail. Only those publications will be described which
received more than 100 citations; these are 14 publications out of the total
of 74 by the time of writing this article. The publications not explicitly men-
tioned here, however, also presented signiﬁcant and often pioneering results
that advanced and shaped the ﬁeld - see [29] for a more complete review of
the physics results of JADE.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

22

CONTENTS

4.1 QCD and Jets

The theory of the Strong Interaction between quarks and gluons, Quantum
Chromodynamics (QCD) [14, 15, 16], was formulated just a few years before
the proposals for the PETRA e+e− collider and its experiments in 1974 to
1976, c.f. Section 3. The most outstanding results of PETRA, the proof of the
existence of the gluon as carrier and exchange quantum of the Strong Force,
and the veriﬁcation of the force’s distinct feature of Asymptotic Freedom,
were not yet identiﬁed as central themes in any of the proposals of PETRA
and its experiments. The general importance of hadronic ﬁnal states of high
energetic e+e− annihilations, however, was recognised as one of the central
physics themes at PETRA, and has largely inﬂuenced the design and layout of
the detectors - for example JADE’s central tracking chamber, the jet-chamber,
and its sophisticated multi-track resolution capabilities.

4.1.1 The Gluon

Topological distributions of hadrons produced in the reaction e+e− → hadrons
revealed a predominant 2-jet like structure already at PETRA’s precursor
e+e− colliders SPEAR [49] and DORIS [50], providing evidence for the under-
lying process of e+e− → qq and susbsequent fragmentation of the quarks to
hadrons, with limited transverse momenta of the hadrons w.r.t. the initial
quark directions.

In 1976, the possibility of observing a third jet at higher c.m. energies,
originating from a hard gluon radiated oﬀ one of the quarks, e+e− → qqg,
was predicted [17]. Gluon radiation in the context of QCD should lead - in
increasing order of the gluon’s hardness12 - to the widening of one of the quark-
jets, to a planar event conﬁguration and, ﬁnally, to the emergence of a third
jet.

Indeed, such event conﬁgurations became visible right from the start of
data taking at PETRA, at c.m. energies around 30 GeV. Corresponding results
were presented, ﬁrst by the TASSO and then by the MARK-J, PLUTO and
JADE experiments, at the European Physical Society (EPS) conference in
Geneva and the Lepton-Photon Symposium at Batavia in summer 1979 [51].
The gluon discovery publications of TASSO, MARK-J, PLUTO and JADE
were submitted to journals in summer 1979 [45, 46, 47, 48].

In [48], JADE reports about an excess of planar events in their sample of
287 hadronic events, at a rate which cannot be explained by statistical ﬂuc-
tuations in the standard two-jet process. The planar events, mostly consisting
of a slim jet on one side and a broader jet on the other, are shown to pos-
sess three-jet structure by demonstrating that the broader jet itself consists of
two collinear jets in its own rest system. Topological event shape distributions
are compared with the predictions of model calculations based on qq produc-
tion and hadronisation with diﬀerent transverse momentum parameters σq,

12“Hard” in this context means high gluon energy and large radiation angle w.r.t. the emitting

quark.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

CONTENTS

23

Fig. 10 3-jet event recorded at Ecm = 33 GeV, displayed as projection of hits in the central
Jet-chamber to the plane perpendicular to the beam axis (central cross), and in a perspective
view of the lead-glass counters. Those counters hit by particles are ﬁlled in black.

and with a model including gluon radiation to qqg ﬁnal states, according to
the expectations of QCD in leading order perturbation theory. These stud-
ies strongly suggest gluon bremsstrahlung as the origin of the planar three-jet
events. A ﬁrst estimate of the value of the strong coupling constant resulted
in αs(q = 30 GeV ) = 0.17 ± 0.04.

The rate of radiative gluon emission is proportional to the strength of the
strong coupling constant which itself is energy dependent. At PETRA energies
the fraction of events with gluon emission is around 10%. The initial evidence
for 3-jet production was therefore mainly based on statistical distributions of
topological event shape distributions, and comparisons with predictions of var-
ious model calculations. Nevertheless, a small number of individual hadronic
events with visible 3-jet structure were already shown at the conferences in
summer 1979. With more statistics gathered, the signiﬁcance for gluons as
the origin of planar events with clear 3-jet structures grew. A particluar nice,

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

24

CONTENTS

“golden” 3-jet event recorded by JADE in 1981 is displayed in Fig. 10. Three
well separated bundles (jets) of tracks of charged particles are clearly visible
by eye, directly from the coordinates of measured hits in the jet chamber,
without the need for displaying ﬁtted track lines. The same structure is also
visible from the clusters of hits in the lead-glass electromagnetic calorimeter.

4.1.2 Jet Physics

The dominant 2-jet structure and the observation of planar 3-jet events in
hadronic ﬁnal states at PETRA energies boosted the acceptance of the quark-
parton model and of QCD as the theory of the Strong Interaction. JADE -
with its high resolution central jet-chamber and lead-glass calorimeter - was
well suited to develop and advance the physics of and with hadron jets, and
to further use jets for signiﬁcant tests of QCD.

After establishing the existence of gluons and of hard gluon radiation
through the observation of 3-jet events, it was consequential to verify if also
4-jet events, a process predicted by second and higher order perturbation the-
ory, can also be seen at PETRA. In a study of event shape distributions that
are sensitive to non-planar event structures, JADE indeed found ﬁrst evidence
for the “Observation of Four - Jet Structure in e+e− Annihilation at
s =
33 GeV” [52]. The energy ﬂow of an event with four well separated jets, later
observed at the highest PETRA energies, is displayed in Figure 11.

√

Fig. 11 Energy ﬂow in the φ - cosθ - plane of an event measured with the JADE detector at
46.7 GeV c.m. energy. φ is the angle in the plane perpendicular to the beamline and θ is the
angle with respect to the beamline. The highest bin corresponds to an energy of 6 GeV[53].

The observed production rates of 4-jet like events, however, appeared to
be larger than predicted by the calculations and models based on QCD in
second order (O(α2
s )) perturbation theory. This motivated to perform further
and more detailed studies of jet production rates and their dynamics, and to
test QCD to a more detailed level.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

CONTENTS

25

For this purpose, JADE developed a jet ﬁnding algorithm [53] that deﬁnes
and reconstructs jets in terms of a resolution parameter, the minimal scaled
invariant pair-mass ycut = min(M 2
ij/E2
vis) that is allowed for any pair of
objects i and j which are considered as resolvable jets, where Evis is the total
(visible) energy of all objects of an event13. The algorithm is infrared and
collinear safe, i.e. it is insensitive to a low-energy or a small-angle splitting of
an object. This feature avoids infrared and collinear singularities in perturba-
tive QCD calculations, such that theory, together with the hypothesis of local
parton-hadron duality [54], provides reliable and well deﬁned predictions of the
expected dynamics of hadron jets, and thus the means for precise experimental
veriﬁcations of QCD.

In “Experimental Studies on Multijet Production in e+e− Annihilation at
PETRA Energies” [53], the most highly cited publication of JADE and of
all PETRA experiments, JADE introduced this jet algorithm and published
2-, 3-, 4- and 5-jet event rates as a function of the jet resolution parameter
ycut, in the c.m. energy range of 14.0 to 46.7 GeV. The data were compared
with model calculations [55] based on O(α2
s ) QCD predictions [56], and with
a parton shower model [57] including multiple gluon radiation according to
leading logarithmic approximations (LLA) and soft gluon coherence eﬀects
[58].

The measured 2- and 3-jet rates and their dependence on the size of the
jet resolution were well described by the O(α2
s ) QCD model, but its deﬁciency
in describing 4- (and higher) jet events was further substantiated. The QCD
shower model described 4- and 5-jet rates well but fell short of reproducing
the relative rates of hard 3-jet events. Both these observations led to further
developments and optimisations of the underlying QCD calculations and their
implementation in QCD models, see e.g. [59, 60] and references quoted therein.
Finally, two years after the shut-down of the PETRA collider, JADE
extended its studies of jet production rates using the full data statistics in the
energy range from 22 to 46.7 GeV [44], and published the ﬁrst “Experimen-
tal Investigation of the Energy Dependence of the Strong Coupling Strength”.
Instead of extracting values of αs(q) at diﬀerent c.m. energies q, which usually
suﬀer from large systematic uncertainties due to the modelling of the hadroni-
sation process, the energy dependence of 3-jet event production rates R3 was
analysed.

According to QCD perturbation theory, the 3-jet rate deﬁned by the JADE
jet algorithm is proportional to the strong coupling. In second and higher per-
turbative order, the prediction reads R3(q) = C1αs(q) + C2α2
s (q) + ..., whereby
the coeﬃcients Cn are - for a given value of ycut - independent of the energy
scale q, and the energy dependence of R3 is solely determined by that of the
coupling strength αs. Additional eﬀects, induced by the hadronisation process,

13The algorithm starts with calculating the scaled invariant pair masses ykl for all pairs of
particles, and replaces the pair with the smallest value of ykl by a new object with four-momentum
pk +pl. The procedure is repeated until all pair masses exceed the value of the resolution parameter
ycut.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

26

CONTENTS

Fig. 12 Three-jet event rates at diﬀerent centre of mass energies for various values of the
jet resolution parameter ycut, together with the predictions of the complete second-order
perturbative QCD calculations of Gottschalk and Shatz (GS) and of Kramer and Lampe
(KL).

are demonstrated to be small and energy independent, in regions of suﬃciently
large values of ycut ≥ 0.06 and for c.m. energies above 22 GeV.

The measured energy dependence of R3, in the c.m. energy range from 22
to 46 GeV and for diﬀerent ﬁxed values of ycut, is shown in Fig.12. With-
out any further correction or modelling of hadronisation eﬀects, the data are
well described by the predictions of O(α2
s ) perturbative QCD [61, 62]. This
applies to both the absolute rates at diﬀerent values of ycut and their observed
energy dependence. The signiﬁcance for discriminating an assumed energy
independence of R3 and thus, of constant αs, is at the level of 4 standard
deviations.

Due to its applicability in both experiment and theory and its rela-
tive insensitivity to hadronisation and nonperturbative eﬀects, the JADE jet
algorithm was adopted by many experiments at e+e− colliders to come, in
particular those at TRISTAN (
s around 60 GeV) of the Japanese KEK labo-
ratory and at the Large Electron Positron collider LEP (
s = 89 to 214 GeV)

√

√

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

CONTENTS

27

at CERN. Later on, in the 1990s and with the experience of the LEP data,
this class of algorithms was further developed, keeping the basic idea of suc-
cessive clustering of particles but modifying the deﬁnition of the jet resolution,
thereby enabling the application of reﬁned theoretical methods (see e.g. [63]).

4.2 Hadronisation Phenomenology

Colour-charged quarks and gluons do not exist as free particles. Instead, they
convert into colour-neutral hadrons. This process cannot be quantiﬁed nor
calculated by QCD perturbation theory, but for now must be parametrised by
means of phenomenological hadronisation, or fragmentation, models.

At the time of early PETRA operation, fragmentation of fast moving
quarks (and antiquarks) was commonly described using the Field-Feynman
model [64], generating particles (mesons) that acquire a fraction z of the longi-
tudinal momentum of the primary quark and a limited transverse momentum
(p⊥) around the initial quark, statistically parametrised by a phenomenologi-
cal fragmentation function f (z) and a gaussian p⊥ distribution with a width
parameter σq.

The model of Field and Feynman was extended to also cover qqg ﬁnal states,
where gluons were ﬁrst split into a secondary qq pair, with subsequent Field-
Feynman like hadronisation of these secondary quarks [65][66]. An alternative
approach to hadronise qqg ﬁnal states was introduced by the Lund group [67],
where fragmentation does not proceed along the directions of the outgoing
quarks, but instead along string-like colour ﬂux lines between the primary
quark and the gluon, and the primary antiquark and the gluon.14

This QCD-inspired treatment of colour-charged quarks and gluons predicts
a depletion of particles in the region between the primary quark and anti-
quark, compared to the regions between the (anti)quark and the gluon. The
”independent” gluon fragmentation models [65, 66] would not predict such a
depletion.

In addition to the string-eﬀect and its QCD-inspired interpretation, QCD
predicts the general properties of gluon-initiated jets to be diﬀerent from
jets initiated by quarks. Due to the larger colour-charge of gluons and the
eﬀects of gluon-self-coupling, particles from gluon jets are expected to exhibit
a broader distribution of transverse momenta p⊥ w.r.t. the principal (gluon-)
jet direction.

4.2.1 String Fragmentation and Diﬀerences between Quark-

and Gluon-Jets

The prediction of the “string-eﬀect” was corroborated, for the ﬁrst time, in
“Experimental study of jets in electron-positron annihilation” [68] by JADE,
and manifested later in a more detailed study of “Particle Distributions in
3-Jet Events Produced by e+e− Annihilation” [69], see Figure 13, and in a

14In 1981 Bo Andersson approached a member of the JADE collaboration with his idea of
the “LUND-string” and how to test it. The studies started without delay and became the thesis
subject of Rolf Felst’s student Alfred Petersen.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

28

CONTENTS

Fig. 13 The average charged and neutral particle density in the angular regions between the
jet axes, normalized by the total number of particles, versus Θi,j /Θjk. The data are shown
together with predictions of the Hoyer and the Lund model. Jets are ordered according to
their energies, E1 ≥ E2 ≥ E3, so that jet #3 is the gluon initiated jet, and jets #1 and #2
are the quark and antiquark jets most of the time.

further “Test of Fragmentation Models by Comparison with Three Jet Events
Produced in e+e− → Hadrons” [70]. The string eﬀect appears as a depletion
of particles in the region between the two highest energetic jets of 3-jet events.
Evidence for the string eﬀect was more than just of academic importance:
experimental determinations of the strong coupling αs - a fundamental param-
eter of nature like the electromagnetic coupling and ﬁne structure constant α
- resulted in signiﬁcantly diﬀerent values of αs when data were corrected for
hadronisation eﬀects using these fundamentally diﬀerent types of models, see
e.g. [71]. The experimental evidence for the string eﬀect was ﬁnally conﬁrmed
by TASSO [72] and by the TPC/2γ Collaboration [73] at the PEP collider
at the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center. Furthermore, it was demonstrated
- in the theoretical framework of local parton-hadron duality - that coher-
ence of soft gluon emission provides the QCD explanation of the string eﬀect

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

CONTENTS

29

observed in experiments [74]. Since that time, the phenomenology of indepen-
dent jet fragmentation is depreciated and the concept of string hadronisation
has become a standard in modelling hadronic ﬁnal states at all generations of
particle colliders following the days of PETRA.

Fig. 14 The average transverse momentum of the charged and neutral particles within
a jet relative to the jet axis, for the three jets as a function of the jet energy for (a) the
experimental data with Ecm > 29 GeV, and (b), (c), (d) for the prediction of the q = g
model, the q (cid:54)= g model (σq = 330 MeV, σg = 500 MeV), and the Lund string fragmentation
model, respectively.

In a further study of 3-jet events, comparing the average transverse momen-
tum (cid:104)p⊥(cid:105) of particles in the lowest energy jet with those in the other jets,
JADE found “Experimental evidence for diﬀerences in (cid:104)p⊥(cid:105) between quark
jets and gluon jets” [75], see Fig. 14. At a given jet energy, the average p⊥ of
particles within the lowest energy jet of a 3-jet event is larger than the average
p⊥ of the other jets.

The string fragmentation model reproduces the observed eﬀect, while for
independent jet fragmentation models, parametrised according to Field and
Feynman, one needs a σq of about 300 MeV for quark jets and of about 500
MeV for gluon jets to explain these data. However, even with increased σq for
the gluon jet, independent jet fragmentation models are not able to reproduce
the string eﬀect as observed in Fig. 13.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

30

CONTENTS

4.2.2 Charged Particle, Neutral Kaon and Baryon Production

Most analyses of e+e− annihilation processes into quarks and gluons require a
precise knowledge and modelling of the fragmentation process. These models
contain a number of free parameters and parametric functions, which are not
given by theory, but must be adjusted to provide an optimal description of
the data. In these models the multiplicity of charged particles is essentially
given by fragmentation functions, determining the relative particle momenta
along the jet direction, and by the fraction of pseudoscalar to vector particles
produced.

In a study “Charged Particle and Neutral Kaon Production in e+e− Anni-
hilation at PETRA” [76], JADE determined experimental constraints on the
parameters controlling these model properties, in a previously unknown c.m.
energy range from 12.0 GeV to 36.7 GeV.

As one example, the energy dependence of the mean charged particle mul-
tiplicity is shown in Fig. 15. It is found to rise faster than logarithmically with
energy. The data can be satisfactorily ﬁtted by functions predicted by pertur-
bative QCD, and also by fragmentation models based on ﬁrst order QCD with
fragmentation parameters properly adjusted.

Fig. 15 Mean charged particle multiplicity as function of the centre-of-mass energy
s.
Only statistical errors are shown. Decay products of neutral kaons are included. The curve
is obtained using the Lund model.

√

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

CONTENTS

31

Distributions of the charged particle multiplicity at diﬀerent c.m. energies
exhibit KNO scaling [77]. These distributions are well described by the Lund
model, while the independent fragmentation model of Hoyer et al. fails in this
respect at c.m. energies above 30 GeV.

√

The observed number of neutral kaons per event varies from 1.1 at

s =
14 GeV to 1.5 at
s = 35 GeV and can be matched by the fragmentation
model with a relative suppression factor γs = 0.27 ± 0.03 ± 0.05 of strange
quarks being produced in the fragmentation process - to be compared to an
expected factor of 1 if strange quarks had the same mass as the light u and d
quarks, and to 0.5 as assumed in the original Field-Feynman model.

√

The production of baryons, bound states of three quarks or three anti-
quarks, was not modelled in early versions of fragmentation models, and details
about baryon production were scarce in the early times of PETRA opera-
tion. In a study of “Baryon Production in e+e− Annihilation at PETRA” [78],
JADE selected candidates of antiprotons p in the momentum range from 0.3
to 0.9 GeV/c, through their speciﬁc energy loss (dE/dx) measured in the cen-
tral jet chamber. In addition, candidates for antilambdas (Λ) were selected
through their decay Λ → pπ+. About 20% of all hadronic events contained a p,
either directly produced in the fragmentation process or from hyperon or reso-
nance decays, and 7% had a Λ. The data indicated an angular anticorrelation
of baryon-antibaryon pairs.

4.3 Electroweak Precision Tests

4.3.1 Total Cross Section

The ratio of the hadron production cross section to the lowest order pointlike
QED cross section, R = σhad/σpt, with σpt = (4π/3s)α2, is a fundamental
quantity in e+e− interactions, as it provides important information about the
number of quark ﬂavours which are produced in the accessible energy range. R
is calculated in the quark-parton model as R = 3ΣqQ2
q, where Qq is the quark
electric charge, and the summation runs over all the produced quark ﬂavours q.
If the threshold for pair production of new charge 2/3 (1/3) quarks is passed,
R is increased by about 36% (9%). The importance of the R measurement
was enhanced by theoretical considerations that predicted the existence of a
yet undetected, sixth quark, i.e. the top quark which was assumed to become
accessible at PETRA. Also, if quarks would have structure, a deviation from
a constant R should be observed.

The value for R is modiﬁed when including the lowest order QCD correc-
tions and electro-weak eﬀects: QCD corrections to ﬁrst order increase R by
about 5% at
s = 30 GeV. The eﬀect of the weak neutral current is energy
s = 37 GeV.
dependent. It increases R by 1.5% at

√

√

Therefore, from early on all PETRA experiments focused on the measure-
ment of the total cross section. During the lifetime of the experiment, JADE
issued three publications covering this topic [21, 79, 80].

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

32

CONTENTS

For these measurements, an important feature of the JADE detector was
its sensitivity to charged particles and photons over 97% and 90% of the full
solid angle, respectively. In a ﬁrst step, multihadron (e+e− → hadrons) events
were identiﬁed by a “charged particles trigger” in combination with a “shower
energy trigger”. Both triggers showed a considerable overlap.

In a second step, multihadron events were selected oﬄine by a set of criteria
which eliminated various sources of background, such as e+e− → e+e− events
(Bhabha scattering), τ pair production or cosmic ray background, by applying
cuts on the momentum balance as well as on the visible energy of events. The
luminosity was determined from small angle Bhabha scattering detected by
the end cap counters.

Fig. 16 Ratio R of the hadronic to the point like cross section as a function of the centre-
of-mass energy

s. The predictions with and without a top quark are also shown.

√

The values for R, obtained from the data collected during the ﬁrst year
of PETRA operation, a total of 357 multihadron events, are shown in Fig 16,
together with data from other experiments. The errors are statistical only.
Assuming only u, d, s, c and b quarks, the naive quark-parton model predicts
R = 11/3. This value is increased from 3.66 to 3.9 by the inclusion of QCD
corrections. The measured values of R are compared with the expected R in
case of the production of a charge 2/3 top-quark pair. There is no evidence in
the data for the production of a new quark ﬂavour with a charge of 2/3.

In a second paper [79], R values were measured in the center of mass energy
range between 12.0 and 36.4 GeV with systematic errors of typically ±3%.
This analysis was based on an integrated luminosity of 38pb−1 accumulated in
1979-1981. About 15 000 multihadron events were obtained.

The number of measured multihadron events was corrected for acceptance,
calculated by a Monte Carlo simulation. In this simulation, the Lund model [55]

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

CONTENTS

33

was used together with the initial state radiative corrections of Berends and
Kleiss [81]. The parameters in the model were chosen such that the measured
and calculated charge multiplicity and neutral kaon production agreed. The
simulation also showed that the fraction of events lost by the hardware trigger
was less than 1% with a negligibly small error.

The data were consistent with a constant R in this energy range with an
average value of 3.97 ± 0.05 (statistical and point-to-point systematic error)
±0.10 (overall normalisation error). Corrections due to QED process of O(α4)
or higher were not included. The data excluded a step in R of ∆R0 > 0.29 at
the 95% conﬁdence level, ruling out the pair production of a charge 2/3 quark
with mass between 7.5 and 17.5 GeV.

Fig. 17 The ratio R measured between
steps of 30 MeV in order to ﬁnd narrow resonances of bound tt states .

s = 39.79 GeV and 46.78 GeV during a scan in

√

The third publication [80] reported the results of the total cross section
measurements in the highest energy range explored by PETRA, between 39.79
and 46.78 GeV, and summarised the results obtained in the entire PETRA
energy range. The speciﬁc goal of the high energy run was the search for the
top quark by a step-wise increase of the energy. Toponium - the lowest mass
bound state of a top- and an antitop-quark - would locally enhance the total
cross section by a factor of 2 to 3.

The R-values of this scan are shown in Fig. 17 as a function of the c.m.
energy. The overall normalisation error is 3.3%, the point-to-point error ±1%.
The data are consistent with a constant value of R in the scanned energy
range. The average value is R = 4.13 ± 0.08 ± 0.14, where the second error is
the overall normalisation error.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

34

CONTENTS

Fig. 18 Summary of the ratio R averaged in bins of 1 GeV c.m. energy. The curve repre-
sents the best ﬁt to the standard electroweak interaction model with QCD corrections, with
αs(30 GeV ) = 0.20 and sin2 θw = 0.23.

Looking at the entire data sample collected by JADE in the time between
1979 and 1986 in the energy range from 12 to 46.8 GeV one obtains Fig. 18.
The plot clearly exhibits two eﬀects, the absence of the top quark (later found
at a much higher mass of 175 GeV), and the good description of data by a ﬁt
to the standard electroweak interaction model, yielding sin2 θW = 0.23+0.03
−0.04 for
the weak mixing angle θW , and exhibiting the tail of the rising cross section
of real Z 0-boson production15.

4.3.2 Charge asymmetry in e+e− → µ+µ−

At the highest PETRA energies the standard electro-weak theory predicts
sizeable interference eﬀects between electromagnetic and weak neutral currents
which should manifest themselves in angular asymmetries. At low energies,
such processes are expected to be well described by QED alone, if contributions
up to O(α3) are included.

In a ﬁrst publication [84], the angular distribution and the s dependence of
the total cross section for the process e+e− → µ+µ− was measured by JADE at
centre of mass energies in the range 12.0 ≤
s ≤ 36.8 GeV. The measurement
was made using the jet chamber to measure directions, momenta and charges
of the outgoing particles. Separation of muon pair candidates from background
processes was achieved with the help of time-of-ﬂight (TOF) counters, lead
glass shower counters, and the muon ﬁlter.

√

15The Z0 boson was discovered in 1983 at CERN’s Super Proton Synchrotron, at a mass of

∼92 GeV/c2 and a decay width of ∼2.5 GeV/c2 [82, 83].

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

CONTENTS

35

The angular distribution of the positive muon for the data above a c.m.
energy of 25 GeV showed, after extrapolation to the full solid angle, a clear
forward-backward asymmetry of A = −(11.8±3.8±1)%, where the ﬁrst error is
statistical and the second one systematic. This asymmetry demonstrates size-
able interference eﬀects between electromagnetic and weak neutral currents,
thereby excluding pure QED by three standard deviations while agreeing well
with the standard model SU(2) x U(1) of Glashow, Salam and Weinberg, which
predicts an asymmetry of A = −7.8% for the same angular acceptance.

An update of these measurements based over a larger energy range, up
to 42 GeV and on higher statistics [85], showed how the forward-backward
asymmetry increased with the center of mass energy, in full agreement with
the prediction of the Standard Model, see Fig. 19.

Fig. 19 Angular distributions of e+e− → µ+µ− for four c.m. energies. The dashed lines
are symmetric ﬁts f (θ) ∝ (1+cos2 θ), the full lines are ﬁts allowing an additional asymmetry
f (θ) ∝ (1 + cos2 θ + B cos θ) [85].

4.3.3 Charge asymmetry in e+e− → bb

Electroweak interference eﬀects in e+e− collisions in the energy range of
PETRA are expected to also lead to a forward backward asymmetry in the
emission of the ﬁnal state quark pairs. This asymmetry can be used to measure
the electroweak charges. The ﬁrst statistically signiﬁcant asymmetry measure-
ments had been performed for purely leptonic ﬁnal states for two main reasons:
(a) Although the interference eﬀects for quarks are expected to be large, the

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

36

CONTENTS

separation of the various ﬂavours has been a problem. (b) The determination
of the primary quark charge is challenging.16

The JADE paper “A Measurement of the Electroweak Induced Charge
Asymmetry in e+e− → bb” [86] describes a method for partially overcoming
these problems for b-quarks, thus enabling the measurement of the forward-
backward charge asymmetry for the process e+e− → bb → µ±+ hadrons.

The ﬂavour separation is based on three observables derived from the kine-
matics of selected hadronic events which contain an identiﬁed inclusive muon:
1) the jet transverse mass, 2) the muon transverse momentum, and 3) the over-
all transverse momentum imbalance, i.e. the missing transverse momentum.
In all three cases, the momentum components are measured transverse to the
major axis of the event sphericity ellipsoid (see e.g. [87]) which deﬁnes the jet
axis. The transverse mass is obtained by summing the transverse momentum
components of all charged and neutral particles (except the muon).

Monte Carlo simulations showed that the probability distribution functions
of these quantities exhibit a good discrimination between light quarks (uds)
and the heavier quarks, c and b [88]. The simulation also reproduced the
detailed shapes of the measured spectra of the observables, indicating that
they are well understood and the JADE detector is suﬃciently hermetic to
allow these variables to be used successfully.

The data used for this analysis were collected up to the summer of 1983
and correspond to an integrated luminosity of 76 pb−1. From the sample of
multihadron events with PETRA beam energies above 15 GeV, 1780 events
were selected containing a muon candidate together with hadrons which sat-
isﬁed the standard JADE visible energy and longitudinal momentum balance
criteria. The average c.m. energy of this sample was 34.6 GeV.

The polar angle θ of the ﬁnal state qq system was estimated using the
sphericity axis. If the event had a µ− in the direction of the e− or a µ+ in
the direction of the e+ beam, then cos θ was deﬁned to be positive. Using the
three variables described above, a likelihood analysis was used to determine
the numbers for forward and backward b events: N F
b =
191.3 ± 16.2. The angular distribution of these events is shown in Fig. 20,
exhibiting a clear forward-backward asymmetry.

b = 114.6 ± 12.5, N B

The ratio of forward-backward events yields, after correcting for accep-
tance, an asymmetry for b-quarks of Ab = (−22.8 ± 6.0 ± 2.5)%. The Standard
Model prediction for the b asymmetry is −25.2% . This number is only 2.8
times that of the µ+µ− asymmetry (and not 3 times as expected from the

16Due to the high quality tracking, in rare cases the full decay of the b-hadrons could be
reconstructed. Dieter Haidt, senior scientist at DESY came to Hamburg after having worked on
the discovery of neutral currents at the Gargamelle bubble chamber at CERN. He recalls: My
choice to join JADE rather than one of the other PETRA groups was based on the fact that
the jet chamber was nearest to a bubble chamber and my experience may perhaps be to the
beneﬁt of the collaboration: Once I found an outstanding event and presented it to the JADE
meeting as a complete cascade decay of a B-hadron, i.e. b → c with subsequent c → s and
ﬁnally manifesting itself as a K in the ﬁnal state. Rather than applause I got the concise
remark by Orito: “Come back, if you have a thousand of such events”. This story is typical for
the rigorous quality requirements in JADE, and also demonstrates the change of paradigm from
optical to electronic recording and analysis of particle reactions.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

CONTENTS

37

Fig. 20 The extracted angular distribution for bb events. The dashed curve is proportional
to 1 + cos2 θ (no asymmetry) and the solid curve is the prediction of the standard model at
34.6 GeV.

ratio of charges) due to the signiﬁcant mass of the b quark. The measurement
is in good agreement with this prediction.

This measured asymmetry can be used to determine a value for the ratio of
the b-quark’s weak axial (ab) to the electric (Qb) charge of ab/Qb = −2.71 +
0.71 (stat) + 0.30 (syst). Assuming ab = ac = −1 , the result determines the b
electric charge: Qb = −0.37+0.13
−0.07 (stat.) ±0.03 (syst.), which is consistent with
charge -1/3 for the b quark.

4.4 Photon Structure Function

Since the early 1970s, deep inelastic scattering processes of highly virtual pho-
tons γ∗ (with Q2 >> p2) on a target real photon (p2 ≈ 0), Q2 being the
4-momentum squared of the virtual and p2 the 4-momentum squared of the
real photon, raised signiﬁcant interest because the structure function of the
photon, F γ
2 (x, Q2), was predicted to exhibit features that are quite diﬀerent
from those of the structure function of protons, F p
2 (x, Q2) - see e.g. [89] for a
summary of the development of the ﬁeld.

In short, such processes can be studied in reactions like e+e− → e+e−+
hadrons, where photons radiated oﬀ the initial electron and positron trans-
form into a ﬁnal state of hadrons. Cross sections of such processes at e+e−
colliders are expressed in terms of photon structure functions F γ
2 (x, Q2) and
F γ
l (x), where Q2 = 4EE(cid:48) sin2(Θ/2) is the squared 4-momentum transfer,
x = Q2/(Q2 + W 2), E and E(cid:48) are the initial and ﬁnal energies of the tagged
highly virtual photon, Θ its polar scattering angle, and W is the invariant
mass of the produced hadronic system.

At low Q2, i.e. a few GeV2, the photon was commonly described to behave
like a vector meson, due to quantum ﬂuctuations of the photon into a meson

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

38

CONTENTS

with the same quantum numbers. In that case, F γ
dependencies similar to F p
Q2 - a feature known as scaling violations.

2 should show Q2 and x
2 , i.e. F2 would decrease, at ﬁxed x, with increasing

It was found, however, that at not too small Q2, the process of e+e− →
e+e−+ hadrons is dominated by the point-like cross section according to
the quark-parton model, where the photon ﬂuctuates into a quark-antiquark
pair, and F γ
2 is predicted to increase with log(Q2) [90]. Furthermore, the x-
dependence of F γ
2 can be calculated within the quark-parton model - which is
also in contrast to F p
2 , where the x-dependence cannot be predicted but must
be determined by experiment. Going beyond the simple quark-parton model
and including eﬀects of gluon dynamics, and thus of QCD, the slope of the
Q2-dependence can be calculated and is predicted to depend only on a single
scale parameter Λ or, alternatively, the QCD coupling strength αs.

Fig. 21 Measured F 2(Q2) obtained by averaging F2(x, Q2) over x 0.1. The 5 lower Q2
points are due to the endcap data and the highest Q2 point is due to the barrel data.
Solid curve= non- asymptotic HOQCD (u, d, s) +QPM (c) with q1(x, Q) = VMD +QPM
and with A = 0.2 GeV. Dashed curve= non-asymptotic HOQCD (u,d,s)+QPM(c) with
q(x,Q)=VMD and with A = 0.2 GeV. Dot-dashed curve= non-asymptotic HOQCD (u,d,s)
with q’(x,Q)=VMD+QPM and with A=0.2 GeV.

JADE measured and analysed hadron production initiated by two photon
interactions, e+e− → e+e−+ hadrons, where one of the scattered electrons
was detected at large angles, with Q2 ranging between 10 and 220 GeV2 [91].
The data were compared with non-asymptotic as well as asymptotic QCD
predictions. The former takes into account both the contributions from the
point-like and vector-meson-like hadronic components of the photon whereas
the latter considers only the point-like contribution.

Charged particles were measured with the central drift chamber, photons
and electrons were measured in the lead glass shower counters. The tagging of

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

CONTENTS

39

the electrons was carried out using either the two arrays of endcap lead glass
counters which covered the polar angular range 245-500 mrad, or the barrel
array of lead glass counters which covered the polar angular range above 609
mrad.

For each hadronic event the Normalised Longitudinal Momentum Bal-
ance (NLMB) was calculated. A cut in this variable provides a very eﬃcient
suppression of hadronic events from e+e− annihilation while hardly aﬀecting
hadronic two photon events. The F γ
2 (x) functions were determined by unfold-
ing the observed data for detection losses and ﬁnite resolution in the JADE
detector at values of 24 and 100 GeV2. They were found to be well described
by asymptotic leading order QCD including only the pointlike contribution
of F γ
2 , which is calculable in perturbative QCD, and with other leading and
higher order QCD calculations and models. For asymptotic leading order QCD,
ΛQCD = 0.15(+0.07, −0.04) GeV was obtained.
The measurements also show that F γ

2 , averaged over the range x > 0.1,
increases as a function of Q2, see Fig. 21. The rise of F2 with Q2 is consis-
tent with the combined eﬀect of the ln(Q2) dependence of F γ
2 ) and the Q2
dependence of the charm quark contribution, although the data show a slightly
steeper slope than the expectation.

5 JADE Data preservation and Software

Revival

5.1 Motivation and overview

Long term preservation of data from large scale high-energy physics (HEP)
experiments is imperative to preserve the ability of addressing scientiﬁc ques-
tions at times long after the completion of those experiments. Very often, these
data are unique achievements in many scientiﬁc respects like energy range,
process dynamics and experimental techniques. New, improved and reﬁned
scientiﬁc questions may require (re-)analysis of such data sets. Investments nec-
essary to repeat past experiments would exceed the eﬀorts of data preservation
by far.

The main reasons driving the quest for data preservation are (see e.g. [92]):

• long term completion of the scientiﬁc program,
• data re-use for new and advanced studies,
• training, education and outreach.

The scientiﬁc motivation for re-using and re-analysing data from past

experiments is given by:
• the availability of new theoretical input in terms of increased precision,

advanced models or new predictions;
• new and improved analysis techniques;
• the desire to perform cross-checks between diﬀerent experiments.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

40

CONTENTS

After the shut-down of the PETRA in 1986, collaborative analyses of JADE
data and publication of results continued with decreasing pace and came to an
end by 1990/1991. The data were ﬁrst moved to a few thousand archive tapes,
later to a storage place outside the computing centre, and ﬁnally disposed of
when the IBM main frame computer was phased out in 1997. The source code
of the JADE software framework was collected and stored on private computer
accounts which were maintained on the IBM main frame until 1997.

The JADE collaboration had no plan for further data preservation and
future use of their data. Private initiatives for long-term preservation started in
1995/1996 at DESY, when Jan Olsson at DESY organised to copy the JADE
data to modern and more eﬃcient data carriers, and to preserve the JADE
software libraries [93].

Driven by the desire to re-analyse JADE data in terms of much advanced
QCD calculations and Monte Carlo models, the resurrection of the JADE
software and its usability on modern computer platforms was initiated in
1996/1997, by one of the authors (SB), then Professor at RWTH Aachen,
and put into practice by Pedro Movilla Fernandez, a diploma- and later PhD-
student at Aachen, and by Jan Olsson. This ﬁrst step of software recovery
was completed by 1999. Until 2013, the revived software, running on IBM
AIX systems, was actively used for new analyses of the JADE data, resulting
in 3 further PhD theses, 10 journal publications and several contributions to
international conferences and workshops.

A second and so far last phase of data preservation started in 2015 and has
basically been executed by Andrii Verbytskyi at the Max-Planck-Institute at
Munich. In this process, the JADE software was migrated to LINUX systems
and modern build tools17.

In March 2022, the members of the JADE collaboration unanimously
decided to release all JADE data and software to be publicly accessible as
“open data” and maintained within the CERN open data initiative [94].
The implementation of JADE data, software and documentation into this
environment is currently in progress.

Digitisation and preservation of documents, auxiliary data and material
like publications, technical and internal notes, collaboration meeting protocols,
the log-books from the experiment’s main control room, photographs from
the time of constructing and operating the detector, and manuals describ-
ing the functionality of the resurrected software and data, are an equally
important heritage to be preserved. Digitised versions of all JADE publica-
tions are accessible through public servers like the InSpire HEP data base
https://inspirehep.net. Digital copies of most of the other documents men-
tioned above were collected and are publicly available at the JADE web
pages maintained at the Max-Planck-Institute of Physics at Munich, https:

17Build tools are programs that automate the creation of executable applications from source

code.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

CONTENTS

41

//www.mpp.mpg.de/en/research/data-preservation/jade. Some of the infor-
mation, like a list and copies of PhD theses performed with JADE data, still
need to be assembled and will be provided in due time.

5.2 Data Preservation

At the end of data taking, the JADE data comprised about 1 TB of raw and
reconstructed data18 - an amount that looks small by standards of the 2020s,
but was huge in the 1980s. The data were stored on thousands of IBM tapes
with 160 MB capacity, plus similar amounts of Monte Carlo generated data
and private data selections.

Space was a problem at the DESY Computer Centre. Data stored on
“Machine Room (M) Tapes” were consecutively moved to “Archive (A)
Tapes”, stored outside of the main computer area, if they weren’t used for a
while. Data on A-Tapes were deleted if they stayed unused for a certain time,
and if there was no response on warning messages issued to the responsible
user. This line of action was also applied to software ﬁles and libraries - unless
they were declared to be “holy” with plausible justiﬁcation. At this point, by
1990, the JADE data and core software were still secured on A-tapes, while
most of the Monte-Carlo generated data had disappeared.

In winter 1991/92, the imminent start-up of the HERA collider required to
recover large amounts of physical space and infrastructure for proper handling
and storage of the new data to come. The DESY computer centre requested
from the PETRA experiments to signiﬁcantly reduce their stores of A-Tapes.
The remaining tapes were packed in big aluminum boxes that could only be
moved by fork-lifts, and stored elsewhere at DESY. At this point, the 1 TB of
JADE data resided in 23 of these big boxes that were stored away in DESY’s
Hall 2, and were deleted from the general catalogue.

By 1995, also the space in Hall 2 was needed for other purposes. Again
the PETRA experiments were asked to discard their remaining data, or else
to arrange for further storage by themselves. In spring 1996, DESY decided to
phase out the IBM Mainframe, also implying that the old IBM tapes would
soon be history. The responsible JADE experts, still being on-site but involved
in other projects like HERA, decided to move all JADE data onto IBM3490
cartridges, thereby reducing the physical volume of the required storage space
such that it ﬁnally “should ﬁt into a drawer”.

Moving the JADE data to modern data carriers also required to rewrite
them such that they could be read on any future computer platform. This
requirement led to a number of diﬃculties and problems, some appearing as
major obstacles at that time, which had to be overcome and solved. The sto-
ries connected to these activities may carry educational messages for future
ventures of that type:

JADE used an early version of the Bank Object System data format [95],
BOS4. As computer memory and storage was precious in the late 1970s and

18About 600 GB of raw data (“REFORM”), 335 GB of reduced and reconstructed data

(“REDUC1” and “REDUC2”), and 85 GB of specialised physics selection data.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

42

CONTENTS

Fig. 22 The JADE data were originally stored on about 6500 IBM tapes, later converted
and written to about 600 IBM3490 cartridges, and nowadays conveniently ﬁt onto a single
2 TB USB memory stick.

early 1980s, a rather intricate structure including combinations of I*2, I*4,
F, and A-words in the banks was used, even assigning single bits and bytes
for various purposes and ﬂags - a fatality if the data are to be processed
on machines which use a diﬀerent byte order than that of the old IBM370.
In order to assure platform independence of the data, they were converted
using FPACK [96]. FPACK, however, only worked with BOS77, and the BOS4
source libraries - although declared “holy” - no longer existed at DESY, or
anywhere else. This initiated a number of archeological initiatives and actions
which ﬁnally retrieved the original BOS4 source code. The code, however, did
not compile any more on any compiler on the IBM mainframe.

Finally, by summer 1997 and having solved all obstacles, the JADE
REDUC data plus some special data selections were successfully copied to
600 IBM3490 cartridges. The REFORM raw data were dropped and no longer
included in the preservation process. The 3490 cartridges were 6 times smaller
than the old IBM tapes, c.f. Fig. 22, and carried 800 MB, i.e. 5 times more data
each. A second copy was written to 200 “Exabyte” cartridges (from Exabyte
Corporation, a US-American provider of innovative storage solutions), carry-
ing up to 2.5 GB each. These were privately stored in the oﬃce of a caring
member of JADE. The volume of the size of a drawer was (almost) reached.

In December 2005, the Exabyte cartridge collection travelled to the Max-
Planck-Institute of Physics in Munich, conveniently packed in a ﬂight-cabin

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

CONTENTS

43

trolley, copied to the Max-Planck Computing and Data Facility (MPCDF) as
a very small part of the huge data space of the ATLAS experiment at the
Large Hadron Collider at CERN, and - due to their “small” size of less than
1 TB - to other discs and cloud services at the MPCDF.

Today, at the time of writing this review, the data ﬁt on a TB USB 3.0
Flash Drive Memory Stick which is available for less than 20 Euro, reducing
the drawer-size to the size of a ﬁnger tip.

In parallel, since the end of the 1980s, the data of calibrated and fully recon-
structed multihadron ﬁnal states, e+e− → hadrons, were maintained using a
private, compact 4-vector format, ZE4V [97]. In 1996, the ZE4V ﬁles were
read on the DESY IBM mainframe, converted to ASCII ﬁles, and were then
stored at the computer centres at RWTH Aachen and - later - at the MPCDF
in Garching.

So the original JADE data were preserved. All of the relevant data? Appar-
ently, a small number of ﬁles, the JADE luminosity ﬁles, escaped preservation
and apparently had been lost in the late 1990s. These ﬁles contained the recon-
structed values of the integrated luminosities of each of the data taking runs,
therefore being essential for calculating physical cross sections of processes
under study. A worldwide search within the JADE collaboration returned no
results, until Jan Olsson found a printed version of the luminosity ﬁles at
DESY. The printout, however, was on green recycling paper and too faint for
scanning and optical character recognition, OCR. Instead, the numbers had
to be typed in a tedious eﬀort into a text ﬁle. Only 5 typing errors were found
and corrected by a checksum routine (that was preserved in the process of
software revival, see below), and so even the luminosity ﬁles were successfully
recovered19.

5.3 Software Revival

Generation of new detector level Monte-Carlo (MC) generated data sets
required the revival of the entire JADE reconstruction and production soft-
ware. The JADE software source libraries were available, with very few
exceptions20, on the DESY IBM main frame, as private copies since 1991. In
1997, the IBM main frame was phased out and the transition to UNIX plat-
forms was made. The original software, consisting of FORTRAN-IV, but also
in part of SHELTRAN and MORTRAN routines, required partial rewriting
or conversion to FORTRAN-77; the functionality of parts of the DESYLIB,
originally written in assembler code, needed to be emulated with FORTRAN
routines.

The reactivation of the JADE software was completed in 1999 [98], and
was used for various new analysis projects at RWTH Aachen and at MPI of
Physics in Munich, until 2013. The new code versions were validated using
various detector-level distributions from original and newly generated MC

19Jan Olsson’s moral on this story [93]: Always keep a printout as backup! (And never throw

papers away).

20The software package for simulating the JADE muon detector escaped long-term archiving

and today must be considered to be inevitably lost.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

44

CONTENTS

Fig. 23 Monte Carlo generated 3-jet event, reconstructed and displayed using the full
revived JADE oﬄine software chain. Note that the display is in colour, a feature that was
not available at JADE running times.

event samples. An important tool of validation was the graphical display of
JADE events, which was revived to full functionality by emulating the originall
graphics and plotting software PLOT10. Since its revival, the event display is
capable of using colours, a feature that was not yet available at running time
of the experiment, see Fig. 23 for a coloured display of a MC-generated, fully
reconstructed hadronic event.

In this ﬁrst phase of software resurrection and data re-use, the revived
JADE software exclusively ran on IBM AIX machines, relying on the fact that
these systems utilise the same byte order as the IBM 370 did21. It was used to
generate new MC-generated data samples, based on modern MC generators,
for correction of detector response and resolution, for unfolding data distribu-
tions and subsequent comparison with new theoretical calculations. The newly
generated MC data sets were converted to the ZE4V format, and physics
analyses were then performed using the ZE4V ﬁles of both real and MC data.
After 2010, the restriction that JADE data analyses could only be per-
formed on IBM AIX platforms became increasingly inconvenient, due to the

21The IBM370 as well as IBM AIX machines operated according to the “big-endian” convention,
i.e. the highest value byte of a (2- or 4-byte) word had the smallest storage address within the
word.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

CONTENTS

45

restricted availability of AIX systems and the general move of scientiﬁc com-
puting to LINUX systems and modern build tools. The second, and so far ﬁnal,
phase of migrating the JADE software to make it compatible with modern
compilers, operating systems and build tools was and still is being executed and
maintained by a small “data preservation” group at the Max-Planck-Institute
of Physics in Munich, with Andrii Verbytskyi as the main active scientist and
computing expert of the group.

This phase of data preservation so far concentrated on using GNU Fortran
and Intel Fortran, both supporting I/O with multiple endianness - an essential
feature to ensure functionality of the JADE software. In order to avoid depen-
dences on meanwhile unsupported software libraries like CERNLIB [99] and
the HIGZ graphic package [100], the required functions were emulated with
the help of ROOT [101]. However, the diﬀerences in the treatment of graphics
in HIGZ and ROOT resulted in instabilities of the detector display program.
Therefore, it is expected that JADE software will beneﬁt from ongoing eﬀorts
to preserve and re-consolidate CERNLIB.

Due to the portability of the cmake build system [102], it is now possible to
compile the JADE software not only on LINUX systems but also, for the ﬁrst
time, on MacOSX. The codebase was put in a public GitHub [103] account,
which allowed for regular automated builds of the JADE software on these
platforms. In order to make modern and generally very complex Monte Carlo
generators compatible with the full JADE detector simulation, a utility for
converting HepMC [104] events into JADE-readable format was created, thus
avoiding the need of multiple diﬀerent interfaces to MC event generators.

5.4 New Results from Resurrected data

With the resurrection and revival of data and software, the second phase of
JADE physics analyses started in 1997 at RWTH Aachen, moving to MPP
Munich in 2000. It was based on analysing calibrated and fully reconstructed
e+e− → hadron events, preserved in the compact ZE4V 4-vector format, and
on newly generated Monte-Carlo event samples, using modern QCD shower
models, processed through the full JADE detector simulation, reconstruction
and ZE4V conversion chain. The typical number of data events used in those
studies is given in Table 3.

Re-analyses of the JADE data were motivated by the signiﬁcant increase of
knowledge, both in theory and experimental techniques, obtained in the 1990s
along with the operation of LEP, the e+e− collider at CERN that operated
from 1989 to 2000 at c.m. energies from 90 to 214 GeV. Speciﬁcally, the main
interest focussed on extending advanced studies of hadronic ﬁnal states and
tests of QCD, see e.g. [105] for a review of QCD results from LEP, to the lower
energy data from PETRA, namely on
• measurements of new and improved observables, like hadronic event shapes,

and application of new and improved jet algorithms,

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

46

CONTENTS

Table 3 The average centre-of-mass energy
collected integrated luminosity L and the number of selected data events, after applying
quality selection cuts, as typically used in the second, post-resurrection phase of JADE
data analyses.

s, the energy range, data taking period,

√

√

s
(GeV)
14.0
22.0
34.6
35.0
38.3
43.8

energy
range (GeV)
13.0-15.0
21.0-23.0
33.8-36.0
34.0-36.0
37.3-39.3
43.4-46.4

year

1981
1981
1981-1982
1986
1985
1984-1985

L
(pb−1)
1.46
2.41
61.7
92.3
8.28
18.8

selected
events
1783
1403
14313
20876
1585
4374

• scrutiny and application of signiﬁcantly improved QCD shower Monte Carlo

generators,

• application of advanced QCD calculations, in next-next-to-leading order
(NNLO) perturbation theory and (next-to-) leading logarithmic approxima-
tion (NLLA),

• precision determinations of the strong coupling parameter αs, and on
• general tests of QCD.

Until 2013, three PhD theses, ten journal publications and several scientiﬁc
presentations at international conferences and proceedings articles emerged
from this second phase of JADE data analyses. The new results were novel
or superior to, but always compatible with those that had been previously
published by JADE. In the following, two areas of major new insights from
these new studies will be reviewed.

5.4.1 New Observables and QCD models: Universal

Description of Hadronisation

√

The ﬁrst results from the revival phase of JADE were published in 1998, titled
A Study of event shapes and determinations of αs using data of e+e− annihi-
lations at
s = 22 GeV to 44 GeV [106]. It was based on the PhD thesis of
P.A. Movilla-Fernandez [107], as the ﬁrst application and use of the resurrected
JADE data and revived software [98]. These ﬁrst results presented measured
distributions of new event shape observables and jet resolution parameters,
their comparison with various improved QCD shower models and event genera-
s = 14, 22,
tors, and the extraction of values of αs(Q) at energy scales of Q ≡
34 and 44 GeV, based on QCD in next-to-leading order (NLO) perturbation
theory plus resummation of next-to-leading logs (NLLA).

√

None of the new observables, the improved QCD generators, the αs results
at the smallest PETRA energies, nor the resummed QCD calculations had
been available at PETRA running time before. Therefore these studies pro-
vided a wealth of new and unique results. While measurements of αs will be
further discussed in the next subsection, another aspect of these results shall
be emphasised here:

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

CONTENTS

47

Fig. 24 Measured distributions of y23, the value of the jet resolution where the event
√
changes from a 2-jet to a 3-jet conﬁguration, at the lowest and highest PETRA energies of
s
= 14 GeV and 44 GeV, compared with various QCD model calculations using hadronisation
parameters obtained from LEP data at

s = 91.2 GeV [107, 108].

√

At PETRA running time, the low energy data at 14 and at 22 GeV were
hardly used, mainly because MC models - at that time, based on LO or NLO
QCD only - did not provide satisfactory descriptions of the data, even if the
hadronisation parameters of those models were re-tuned at each energy. In
contrast, the new JADE studies used the new and improved QCD shower
models, which include gluon emission processes to much higher orders, down
to much lower invariant masses of O(1 GeV), leaving a much smaller phase
space for the nonperturbative hadronisation process. Using those shower mod-
els with hadronisation parameters optimised to describe the LEP data around
the Z 0 pole, leaving all parameters including the QCD scale parameter Λ con-
stant22, surprisingly resulted in an excellent description of JADE data at all
PETRA energies, see Fig. 24. This observation is compatible with the QCD

22Note that QCD predicts the running and energy dependence of αs ∼ log (Λ/Q), with Λ being

a constant scale parameter.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

48

CONTENTS

expectation of a running coupling and an energy-independent description of
the hadronisation process.

Fig. 25 The values for αs at the JADE energy points. The inner error bars correspond
to the combined statistical and experimental errors and the outer error bars show the total
errors. The results from
s = 34.6 and 35 GeV have been combined for clarity. The full and
dashed lines indicate the QCD prediction of the running coupling based on the combined
JADE NNLO result. The results from an NNLO analysis of OPAL data are shown as well
[110, 112].

√

5.4.2 Measurements of αs and Signature of Asymptotic

Freedom

Most of the JADE revival studies explicitly or indirectly dealt with determi-
nations of the strong coupling αs, owing to a special feature of the JADE data:
the wide range of “low” c.m. energies where the QCD prediction of the run-
ning coupling is particularly pronounced. Starting with the ﬁrst publication
mentioned in the previous subsection [106], the next step was a precise deter-
mination from jet-production rates alone, still in resummed NLO QCD. This
was a concerted study of both the JADE collaboration and the OPAL collabo-
ration at LEP, leading to a precise, combined result of αs(MZ0 ) = 0.1187+0.0034
−0.0019
[109].

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

CONTENTS

49

The so far “ultimate” determination of αs from JADE data was based
on a study of event shape and jet resolution distributions and the applica-
tion of the latest, state-of-the-art QCD predictions in complete and resummed
NNLO + NLLA perturbation theory [110]. The combined results from six dif-
ferent event shape observables at six JADE centre-of-mass energies from 14
to 44 GeV, assuming the QCD prediction of a running coupling and convert-
ing all results the reference energy scale of the Z0 rest mass, is αs(MZ0 ) =
0.1172±0.0006(stat.)±0.0020(exp.)±0.0035(had.)±0.0030(theo.). This result
signiﬁcantly contributes to and is compatible with the current world average
value [111].

More important, the values obtained for the diﬀerent c.m. energy scales
are compatible with the predicted QCD running of the coupling, and with
the results obtained from an identical (but separate) analysis of the OPAL
data at LEP [112], see Fig. 25. In fact, the JADE results alone exclude the
absence of running with a signiﬁcance and conﬁdence level of 99% - a wonderful
conﬁrmation and signiﬁcant strengthening of JADE’s early Investigation of
the Energy Dependence of the Strong Coupling Strength [44], see Sec. 4.1.2.

6 Summary and closing remarks

From today’s perspective, JADE was a rather small collaboration, consisting -
in total and summed over the active lifetime of the experiment - of about 130
scientists, technicians and engineers from 8 institutions in Germany, England,
Japan and the USA [1]. The detector, though, already exhibited key features
of today’s large experiments in high energy physics, concerning hermeticity
and sensitivity to detect and measure the features of charged leptons, photons,
charged particles and hadron jets. With only about 50 to 70 collaborators at a
given time, the fast planning and construction, the eﬃcient operation, detector
maintenance and upgrade, and data analysis was challenging but successfully
accomplished. The close and personal collaboration between all members was
a unique experience, an enormous pleasure and privilege, and door-opener for
many future careers. JADE is us and we are JADE is the motto guiding the
relation and the still ongoing contact between its members. Fig. 26 shows the
members of the JADE collaboration at their reunion at DESY in August 2009.
Together with its friendly competitor experiments CELLO, MARK-J,
PLUTO and TASSO, JADE co-discovered the gluon, tested the electro-weak
standard model of particle physics, explored many aspects of hadron, lepton
and photon production at PETRA, established signiﬁcant tests of QCD and
measurements of the QCD coupling, advanced two-photon physics, performed
searches for Supersymmetry and other signals of physics beyond the standard
model.

JADE’s pioneering and unique contributions were the development and
establishment of the JADE jet ﬁnding algorithm that was widely used and
further developed thereafter, the evidence for string fragmentation, and the
evidence for asymptotic freedom of quarks and gluons. The results on the

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

50

CONTENTS

Fig. 26 The JADE Collaboration at its reunion in August 2009. From left to right: -front
row, sitting/bending: Robin Marshall, Klaus Kleinworth, G¨unter Eckerlin, Rolf Felst, Siggi
Bethke, Tomio Kobayashi, Alfred Petersen, Sachio Komamiya, Manfred Zimmer - ﬁrst row
standing: Hanns Krehbiel†, Peter Warming, Wulfrin Bartel†, Uwe Schneekloth, Rolf Heuer,
Karlheinz Meier†, Sakue Yamada, Dieter Haidt, Hiroshi Takeda - second row standing:
Hans von der Schmitt, Jan Olsson, Farid Ould-Saada, Tatsuo Kawamoto, Hans Rieseberg,
Hajime Matsumura, Karl Ambrus, Michael Kuhlen, Austin Ball, Andreas Dieckmann, Har-
rison Prosper, - back row(s) standing: J¨urgen von Krogh, Eckhard Elsen, Joachim Heintze†,
Rainer Ramcke†, Norbert Magnussen, Paul Murphy†, G¨otz Heinzelmann, Henning Kado,
Stefan Kluth, Roger Barlow, unidentiﬁed person, Hugh McCann, Herbert Drumm, Albrecht
Wagner.

energy dependence of αs and the signature of asymptotic freedom were a deci-
sive element of granting the 2004 Nobel Prize in Physics [113] to the fathers of
Asymptotic Freedom of Quarks and Gluons, D.J. Gross, F. Wilczek and H.D.
Politzer.

The long-term preservation of JADE data and the revival of the JADE
software, the second phase of data analysis starting more than 10 years after
shut-down of the experiment, and last not least the decision to save and convert
JADE’s heritage to ”open data”, for future unrestricted and public use, are
unique key features of JADE. They raised international recognition and serve
as motivation for large scale eﬀorts of data preservation in particle physics
[114] and beyond.

The question was it worth the eﬀort? can be answered with a clear yes!
Besides being a show-case for similar initiatives currently going on, the scien-
tiﬁc output of re-analysing old data with advanced methods and knowledge is
more than worth the eﬀort, and will appear in the future, for many cases again.
Such initiatives, however, should deserve more concerted eﬀort and resources
than was available for the case of JADE. For current and future scientiﬁc
endeavours that generate orders of magnitude larger amounts of data and
software, and that may operate for signiﬁcantly longer time durations, it will
be vital to organise, prepare and proﬁt from data and software preservation
already during active life-time of the project, see e.g. [115].

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

REFERENCES

51

In the case of JADE, retroactive data and software preservation was only
possible through personal initiatives of a few motivated and passionate indi-
viduals. Jan Olsson, one of the key persons in this process, commented this fact
[93] by citing Erich K¨astner, a famous German writer, publicist and cabaret
artist:

Es gibt nichts Gutes,
ausser man tut es! 23

May JADE and the awareness for data preservation live forever!

Acknowledgements We are deeply grateful to our JADE colleagues for the
extremely successful and pleasant cooperation, and for their open team spirit
and continued sense of belonging since the close-down of the experiment. We
especially thank Jan Olsson for his tireless dedication to preserving the heritage
of JADE, and Pedro Movilla-Fernandez and Andrii Verbytskyi for their invalu-
able contributions to reactivate and ensure future use of the JADE software.
We thank E. Elsen, R. Felst, D. Haidt, R. Marshall, J. Olsson, A. Verbyt-
skyi and S. Yamada for their corrections, suggestions, additional information
and memorable stories. SB acknowledges ﬁnancial support of the data preser-
vation project through the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) and the
Max-Planck-Society (MPG).

References

[1] The JADE Collaboration: J. Allisone, K. Ambrusc, J. Armitagee, J.
Bainese, A.H. Balle, G. Bamforde, R. Barlowe, W. Bartela, L. Beckera,
A. Belld, S. Bethkec, C. Bowderyd, T. Canzlera, S.L. Cartwrightg,
J. Chrine, D. Clarkeg, D. Cordsa, D.C. Darvilld, A. Dieckmannc, G.
Dietrichb, P. Dittmanna, H. Drummc, I.P. Duerdothe, G. Eckerlinc, R.
Eichlera, E. Elsenb, R. Felsta, A. Finchd, F. Fosterd, R.G. Glasserf ,
I. Glendinninge, M.C. Goddardg, T. Greenshawe, J. Hagemannb, D.
Haidta, J.F. Hassarde, R. Hedgecockg, J. Heintzec, G. Heinzelmannb,
K.H. Hellenbrandc, M. Helmb, R. Heuerc, P. Hillf , G. Hughesd, M.
Imorih, H. Jungea, H. Kadob, J. Kanzakih, S. Kawabataa, K. Kawagoeb,
T. Kawamotoh, B.T. Kinge, C. Kleinwortb, G. Kniesa, T. Kobayashih, S.
Komamiyac, M. Koshibah, H. Krehbiela, M. Kuhlenb, P. Laurikainena,
P. Lennertc, F.K. Loebingere, A.A. Macbethe, N. Magnussenb, R.
Marshallg, T. Mashimoh, H. Matsumurac, H. McCanne, K. Meierb, R.
Meinkea, R.P. Middletong, H.E. Millse, M. Minowah, P.G. Murphye,
B. Naroskaa, T. Nozakid, M. Nozakih, J. Nyed, S. Odakah, T. Oestb,
J. Olssona, L.H. O’Neilla, S. Oritoh, F. Ould-Saadab, G.F. Pearceg,
A. Petersenb, E. Pietarienena, D. Pitzlb, H. Prospere, J.J. Pryced, R.
Pustb, R. Ramckeb, H. Riesebergc, P. Rowee, A. Satoh, D. Schmidta,
U. Schneeklothb, B. Sechi-Zornf , J.A. Skardf , L. Smolikc, J. Spitzerc,
P. Steﬀena, K. Stephense, T. Sudah, H. Takedah, T. Takeshitah, Y.

23engl.: There is nothing good unless you do it.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

52

REFERENCES

Totsukah, H. v.d.Schmittc, J. von Kroghc, A. Wagnerc, S.R. Wagnerf ,
I. Walkerd, P. Warmingb, Y. Watanabeh, G. Weberb, A. Wegnerb, H.
Wenningera, J.B. Whittakerg, H. Wriedtd, S. Yamadah, C. Yanagisawah,
W.L. Yena, M. Zacharaa, Y. Zhanga, M. Zimmerc, G.T. Zornf
a Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron DESY, Hamburg, Germany
b II. Institut f¨ur Experimentalphysik der Universit¨at Hamburg, Germany
c Physikalisches Institut der Universit¨at Heidelberg, Germany
d University of Lancaster, England
e University of Manchester, England
f University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA
g Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, Chilton, Didcot, England
h International Center for Elementary Particle Physics, ICEPP, Univer-
sity of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
JADE revival

S. Bethkea,b, O. Biebela,b,c, M.
Blumenstengela,b, S. Kluthb, P.A. Movilla-Fernandeza,b, C. Pahla,b, P.
Pfeifenschneidera, J.E. Olssond, J. Schieckb,c and A. Verbytskyib
a III. Phys. Institut, RWTH Aachen, Germany
b Max-Planck-Institute of Physics, Munich, Germany
c Ludwig-Maximilian-University, Munich, Germany
d Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron DESY, Hamburg, Germany

group:

[2] The

[3] F.J. Hasert et al., Gargamelle Neurino Collaboration, Observation of
Neutrino Like Interactions Without Muon Or Electron in the Gargamelle
Neutrino Experiment, Phys. Lett. B46 (1973) 138.

[4] S. Glashow, Partial Symmetries of Weak Interactions, Nucl. Phys. 22

(1961) 579.

[5] S. Weinberg, A Model of Leptons, Phys. Rev. Lett. 19 (1967) 1264.
[6] A. Salam, Weak and Electromagnetic Interactions, Conf.Proc.C 680519

(1968) 367.

[7] https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1979/summary/
[8] J. J. Aubert et al., E598 Collaboration, Experimental Observation of a

Heavy Particle J, Phys. Rev. Lett. 33 (1974) 1404.

[9] J. E. Augustin et al., SLAC-SP-017 Collaboration, Discovery of a Narrow
Resonance in e+e− Annihilation, Phys. Rev. Lett. 33 (1974) 1406.

[10] https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1976/summary/
[11] M.L: Perl et al., Evidence for Anomalous Lepton Production in e+e−

Annihilation, Phys. Rev. Lett. 35 (1975) 1489.

[12] https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1995/summary/
[13] S.W. Herb et al., Observation of a Dimuon Resonance at 9.5 GeV in
400-GeV Proton-Nucleus Collisions, Phys. Rev. Lett. 39 (1977):252.
[14] H. Fritzsch, M. Gell-Mann, H. Leutwyler, Advantages of the Color Octet

Gluon Picture, Phys. Lett. B47 (1973) 365.

[15] D.J. Gross, F. Wilczek, Ultraviolet Behavior of Nonabelian Gauge

Theories, Phys. Rev. Lett. 30 (1973) 1343.

[16] H.D. Politzer, Reliable Perturbative Results for Strong Interactions?,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 30 (1973) 1346.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

REFERENCES

53

[17] J. R. Ellis, M.K. Gaillard, G. G. Ross, Search for Gluons in e+e− Anni-
hilation, Nucl. Phys. B 111 (1976) 253, Nucl. Phys. B 130 (1977) 516
(erratum).

[18] G. F. Sterman, S. Weinberg, Jets from Quantum Chromodynamics, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 39 (1977) 1436.

[19] G. A. Voss, Petra, An Extension of the Storage Ring Facilities at Desy,

IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 22 no. 3 (1975) 1374;
G.A. Voss, Der 19 GeV e+e− Speicherring PETRA, Phys. Bl. 36 Nr. 9
(1980) 267.

[20] https://inspirehep.net/conferences/963950.
[21] W. Bartel et al., JADE Collaboration, Total Cross-Section for Hadron
Production by e+e− Annihilation at PETRA Energies, Phys. Lett. B 88
(1979) 171.

[22] D.P. Barber et al., Mark-J Collaboration, Physics with High-Energy Elec-
tron Positron Colliding Beams with the MARK-J Detector, Phys. Rept.
63 (1980) 337.

[23] R. Brandelik et al., TASSO Collaboration, Properties of Hadron Final
States in e+e− Annihilation at 13 GeV and 17GeV Center-Of-Mass
Energies, Phys. Lett. B 83 (1979) 261.

[24] V. Blobel (PLUTO Collaboration), Results from PLUTO at PETRA,

DESY-79/42 (1979).

[25] L. Criegee et al., PLUTO, a 4π Detector for DORIS, Proc. 1973 Int.

Conf. on Instr. for High Energy Physics, 707 (1973).

[26] M.J. Schachter, CELLO Collaboration, CELLO: A New Detector at

PETRA, Phys.Scripta 23 (1981) 610; DESY-80/128 (1980).

[27] D.P. Barber et al., JADE - Proposal

for a Magnetic Detector
at PETRA, 1976 (undated and unnumbered, electronic copy avail-
able at https://www.mpp.mpg.de/ﬁleadmin/user upload/Forschung/
Fruehere Experimente/JADE/JADE Proposal 1976.pdf).

[28] W. Farr et al., A Drift Chamber System for the Detection of Narrow
Particle Jets from e+e− Reactions, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. 156 (1978)
283.

[29] B. Naroska, e+e− Physics with the JADE Detector at PETRA, Phys.

Rept. 148 (1987) 67.

[30] W. Farr and J. Heintze, Drift Chamber Electronics for Time and Pulse
Height Measurements with Multiple Hit Capacity, Nucl. Instr. and Meth.
156 (1978) 301.

[31] wikipedia.org.
[32] H.E. Mills, Online Event Filtering in the JADE Data Acquisition System.

Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A247 (1986) 525.

[33] http://heim.bitraf.no/tingo/ﬁles/nd/ND-06.008.01A NORD-10 S

Reference Manual June 1977 ocr.pdf

[34] D. Cords, P. Dittmann, R. Eichler and H.E. Mills, The Data Acquisition
System for the JADE Detector, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A245 (1986) 137.

[35] https://nextcloud.mpp.mpg.de/nextcloud/index.php/s/

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

54

REFERENCES

SLBpNDe7eY2SmeL?dir=undeﬁned&path=%2FJADE%20LogBooks&
openﬁle=803830

[36] S. Orito et al. [JADE], First Results from JADE, eConf C790823 (1979),

52 DESY-79-77.

[37] H. Fritzsch, Electromagnetism as the Origin of the Lepton and Quark
Masses, contribution to: 18th Rencontres de Moriond: Electroweak
Interactions, 379-400; MPI-PAE/PTh 25/83, April 1983.
[38] https://www.mpp.mpg.de/en/research/data-preservation/jade
[39] C. Kleinwort et al. [JADE], A Measurement of the τ Lepton Lifetime, Z.

Phys. C42 (1989) 7.

[40] W. Farr, R.D. Heuer and A. Wagner, Readout of Drift Chambers with a
100-MHz Flash ADC System, IEEE Trans.Nucl.Sci. 30 (1983) 95.
[41] G. Eckerlin et al., Front End Processing for a 100 MHz Flash-ADC-
in: Conference on VME-Bus in Physics, 7-8 October 1985.

System,
Geneva, Switzerland (C85-10-07.2), CERN-86-01, p. 147.

[42] https://inspirehep.net called for ﬁnd cn jade and date before 1995 on

January 6, 2022.

[43] W. Bartel et al. [JADE], Experimental Studies on Multi-Jet Production
in e+e− Annihilation at PETRA Energies, Z. Phys. C 33 (1986), 23;
doi:10.1007/BF01410449.

[44] S. Bethke et al. [JADE], Experimental Investigation of the Energy Depen-
dence of the Strong Coupling Strength, Phys. Lett. B 213 (1988), 235;
doi:10.1016/0370-2693(88)91032-5.

[45] R. Brandelik et al. [TASSO], Evidence for Planar Events in e+e− Anni-
hilation at High-Energies, Phys. Lett. B 86 (1979) 243; doi:10.1016/0370-
2693(79)90830-X.

[46] D.P. Barber et al. [MARK-J], Discovery of Three Jet Events and a Test
of Quantum Chromodynamics at PETRA Energies, Phys.Rev.Lett. 43
(1979) 830; doi:doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.43.830.

[47] Ch. Berger et al.

[PLUTO], Evidence for Gluon Bremsstrahlung in
e+e− Annihilations at High-Energies, Phys.Lett.B 86 (1979) 418;
doi:10.1016/0370-2693(79)90869-4.

[48] W. Bartel et al. [JADE], Observation of Planar Three Jet Events in e+e−
Annihilation and Evidence for Gluon Bremsstrahlung, Phys. Lett. B 91
(1980), 142; doi:10.1016/0370-2693(80)90680-2.

[49] G. Hanson et al., Evidence for Jet Structure in Hadron Production by

e+e− Annihilation, Phys. Rev. Letters 35 (1975) 1609.

[50] Ch. Berger et al., A Study of Jets in Electron Positron Annihilation into
Hadrons in the Energy Range 3.I to 9.5 GeV Phy. Lett. B 78 (1978) 176.
[51] TASSO Collab., talks by R. Cashmere, P. S¨oding and G. Wolf, Intern,

Conf. on High energy physics (Geneva, June 27-July 4, 1979);
JADE Collab., talk by S. Orito,
MARK J Collab., talk by H. Newman,
PLUTO Collab., talk by Ch. Berger, and
TASSO Collab., talk by G. Wolf, Intern. Symp. on Lepton and photon

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

interactions at high energies (FNAL, August 23-29, 1979).

REFERENCES

55

[52] W. Bartel et al. (JADE), Observation of Four - Jet Structure in e+e−

Annihilation at

s = 33 GeV, Phys.Lett.B 115 (1982) 338.

√

[53] W. Bartel et al. (JADE), Experimental Studies on Multi-Jet Production
in e+e− Annihilation at PETRA Energies, Z.Phys.C 33 (1986) 23.
[54] Ya.I. Azimov et al., Similarity of Parton and Hadron Spectra in QCD

Jets, Z.Phys.C 27 (1985) 65.

[55] T. Sj¨ostrand, The Lund Monte Carlo for e+e− Jet Physics, Com-

put.Phys.Commun. 28 (1983) 229.

[56] F. Gutbrod, G. Kramer, G. Schierholz, Higher Order QCD Corrections
to the Three Jet Cross-Sections: Bare Versus Dressed Jets, Z. Phys. C
21 (1984) 235.

[57] B.R. Webber, A QCD Model for Jet Fragmentation Including Soft Gluon

Interference, Nucl. Phys. B 238 (1984) 492.

[58] G. Marchesini, B.R. Webber, Simulation of QCD Jets Including Soft

Gluon Interference, Nucl. Phys. B 238 (1984) 1.

[59] S. Bethke, An Experimental Approach to Optimize and Test Perturbative

QCD to O(α2

s ), Z.Phys.C 43 (1989) 331.

[60] M.Z. Akrawy et al. (OPAL Collaboration), A Study of Jet Production
Rates and a Test of QCD on the Z 0 Resonance, Phys.Lett.B 235 (1990)
389.

[61] T.D. Gottschalk and M.P. Shatz, A Reassessment of the O(α3

s ) Three

Jet Cross-section for e+e− Annihilation, Phys. Lett. B 150 (1985).
[62] G. Kramer and B. Lampe, Jet Cross-Sections in e+e− Annihilation,

DESY-86-119, Fortsch.Phys. 37 (1989) 161.

[63] S. Bethke, Z. Kunszt, D.E. Soper and W.J. Stirling, New jet cluster
algorithms: Next-to-leading order QCD and hadronization corrections,
Nucl.Phys.B 370 (1992) 310-334, Nucl.Phys.B 523 (1998) 681-681
(erratum).

[64] R.D. Field and R.P. Feynman, A parametrization of the properties of

quark jets, Nucl. Phys, B 136 (1978) 1.

[65] P. Hoyer et al., Quantum Chromodynamics and Jets in e+e-, Nucl. Phys.

B161 (1979) 349.

[66] A. Ali et al., A QCD Analysis of the High-Energy e+e− Data from

PETRA, Phys. Lett. 93B (1980) 155.

[67] B. Andersson et al., How to ﬁnd the gluon jets in e+e− annihilation

Phys.Lett. 94B (1980) 211.

[68] W. Bartel et al., (JADE) Experimental study of jets in electron-positron

annihilation, Phys. Lett. B 101 (1981) 129.

[69] W. Bartel et al.(JADE), Particle Distribution in Three Jet Events

Produced by e+e− Annihilation, Z.Phys.C 21 (1983) 37.

[70] W. Bartel et al. (JADE), Test of Fragmentation Models by Comparison
with three-jet Events produced in e+e− → hadrons, Phys. Lett. B 134
(1984) 275.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

56

REFERENCES

[71] H.J. Behrend et al (CELLO), On the Model Dependence of the Deter-
mination of the Strong Coupling Constant in Second Order QCD From
e+e− Annihilation Into Hadrons, Phys.Lett.B 138 (1984) 311.

[72] M. Althoﬀ et al. (TASSO), A Study of Three Jet Events in e+e− Annihi-
lation Into Hadrons at 34.6-GeV Center-Of-Mass Energy, Z.Phys.C 29
(1985) 29.

[73] H. Aihara et al (TPC Collaboration), Tests of models for parton frag-
mentation using three jet events in e+e− annihiliation at
s = 29 GeV,
Phys.Rev.Lett. 54 (1985) 270, Phys.Rev.Lett. 54 (1985) 1209 (erratum).
[74] Ya.I. Azimov, Yu.L. Dokshitzer and V.A. Khoze, The String Eﬀect and

√

QCD Coherence, Phys. Lett. B 165 ( 1985) 147.

[75] W. Bartel et al. (JADE), Experimental evidence for diﬀerences in (cid:104)p⊥(cid:105)
between quark jets and gluon jets, Phys. Lett. B 123 (1983) 460.

[76] W. Bartel et al. (JADE), Charged Particle and Neutral Kaon Production

in e+e− Annihilation at PETRA, Z. Phys. C 20 (1983) 187.
[77] Z. Koba, H. Nielsen and P. Olesen, , Nucl. Phys. B 40 (1972) 317.
[78] W. Bartel et al. (JADE), Baryon Production in e+e− Annihilation at

PETRA, Phys. Lett. B 104 (1981) 325.

[79] W. Bartel et al. (JADE), Precise Measurement of Total Cross Sections
for the Process e+e− → multihadrons in the CM Energy Range Between
12.0 and 36.4 GeV, Phys. Lett. B 129145.

[80] W. Bartel et al. (JADE), A Measurement of the Total Cross Section and
a Study of Inclusive Muon Production for the Process e+e− → hadrons
in the energy range between 39.79 GeV and 46.78 GeV, Phys. Lett B
160 (1985) 337.

[81] F.A. Berends and R.Kleiss, Initial State Radiation for e+e− Annihilation

Into Jets, Nucl. Phys. B 178 (1981) 141.

[82] G. Arnison et al. (UA1 Coollaboration), Experimental Observation of
Lepton Pairs of Invariant Mass Around 95 GeV/c**2 at the CERN SPS
Collider, Phys. Lett. B126 (1983) 398.

[83] P. Bagnaia et al. (UA2 Collaboration), Evidence for Z 0 → e+e− at the

CERN pp collider, Phys. Lett. B129 (1983) 130.

[84] W. Bartel et al., Observation of a Charge Asymmetry in e+e− → µ+µ−,

Phys.Lett.B 108 (1982) 140.

[85] W. Bartel et al., (JADE), New results on e+e− → µ+µ− from the JADE

detector at PETRA, Z. Phys. C 26 (1985) 507.

[86] W. Bartel et al. (JADE), A measurement of the electroweak induced
charge asymmetry in e+e− → bb, Phys. Lett. B 146 (1984) 437.
[87] W. Bartel et sl. (JADE), Search for New Flavor Production at PETRA,

Phys. Lett. B 89 (1979) 136.

[88] R. Marshall, The Separation of Quark Flavors in e+e− Annihilation and

Its Applications, Z. Phys. C 26 (1984) 291.

[89] A.J. Buras, Photon structure functions: 1978 and 2005, Acta

Phys.Polon.B 37 (2006) 609; hep-ph/0512238.

[90] T.F. Walsh, Peter M. Zerwas, Two Photon Processes in the Parton

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

REFERENCES

57

Model, Phys. Lett. B 44 (1973) 195.

[91] W. Bartel et al. (JADE), Experimental Study of the Photon Structure
Function F2 at Q2 from 10 GeV2 to 220 GeV2, Z. Phys. C 24 (1984) 231.
[92] S. Bethke, Data Preservation in High Energy Physics - why, how and
when?, contribution to: QCD 10, Montpellier 2010, Nucl. Phys. B Proc.
Suppl. 207-208 (2010) 156, e-Print: 1009.3763 [hep-ex].

[93] J.E. Olsson, The Preservation of

the JADE Data (and Soft-
ware), presentation given at the JADE revival meeting at DESY,
August 2009, https://nextcloud.mpp.mpg.de/nextcloud/index.php/s/
SLBpNDe7eY2SmeL?dir=undeﬁned&path=%2FJADE%20Meetings&
openﬁle=826475.

[94] https://opendata.cern.ch/, 2021.
[95] V. Blobel, The BOS System,

https://www.desy.de/∼sschmitt/blobel/bosman.pdf

[96] V. Blobel, FPACK manual,

https://www.desy.de/∼sschmitt/blobel/fpack.txt

[97] G. Eckerlin and M. Zimmer, A New Compact Data Format Description

of Bank ZE4V, JADE Computer Note99, 1988.

[98] P.A. Movilla Fernandez, A guide to the resurrected JADE data and

software, JADE Computer note 103, MPP-2003-279 (2003).

[99] https://cernlib.web.cern.ch/cernlib/.
[100] High Level Interface to Graphics and Zebra Users Guide, CERN Program
Library Long Writeups Q120 and Y251, https://cds.cern.ch/record/
2296381/ﬁles/higz.pdf (1998).

[101] R. Brun and F. Rademakers, ROOT - An Object Oriented Data Analysis
Framework, Proceedings AIHENP96 Workshop, Lausanne, Sep. 1996,
Nucl. Inst. Meth. in Phys. Res. A 389 (1997) 81-86; see also https://
root.cern.

[102] https://cmake.org
[103] https://github.com.
[104] A. Buckley et al., The HepMC3 event record library for Monte
generators, Comp.Phys.Comm. 260 (2021) 107310,

Carlo event
arXiv:1912.08005 [hep-ph].

[105] S. Bethke, QCD Studies at LEP, Phys.Rept. 403-404 (2004) 203, hep-

ex/0406058.

[106] P.A. Movilla-Fernandez et al., A Study of event shapes and determina-
s = 22 GeV to 44 GeV,

tions of αs using data of e+e− annihilations at
Eur. Phys .J. C 1 (1998) 461, hep-ex/9708034.

√

[107] P.A. Movilla-Fernandez, Studien zur Quantenchromodynamik und Mes-
sung der starken Kopplungskonstanten αs bei
s = 14 − 44 GeV mit
dem JADE Detektor, PhD thesis RWTH Aachen, PITHA 03/01 (2003).
[108] S. Kluth et al., QCD studies with resurrected JADE data, Contribu-
tion to 38th Rencontres de Moriond on QCD and High-Energy Hadronic
Interactions, hep-ex/0305023.

√

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

58

REFERENCES

[109] P. Pfeifenscheider et al. (JADE and OPAL Collaborations), QCD anal-
yses and determinations of αs in e+e− annihilation at energies between
35 GeV and 189 GeV, Eur. Phys. J. C 17 (2000) 19, hep-ex/0001055.

[110] S. Bethke et al. (JADE Collab.), Determination of the Strong Coupling
αs from hadronic Event Shapes with O(α3
s ) and resummed QCD predic-
tions using JADE Data, Eur. Phys. J. C 64 (2009) 351, e-print 0810.1389
[hep-ex].

[111] P.A. Zyla et al. (Particle Data Group), Prog. Theor. Exp. Phys. 2020,

083C01 (2020) and 2021 update.

[112] G. Abbiendi et al. (OPAL Collab.), Determination of αs using OPAL
s = 91 - 209 GeV and resummed NNLO

hadronic event shapes at
calculations, Eur. Phys. J. C71 (2011) 1733.

√

[113] https://www.nobelprize.org/uploads/2018/06/

advanced-physicsprize2004.pdf

[114] Status Report of the DPHEP Study Group: Towards a Global Eﬀort for
Sustainable Data Preservation in High Energy Physics; Z. Akopov et al.
(The DPHEP Study Group), e-Print: 1205.4667 [hep-ex];
Data Preservation in High Energy Physics, https://dphep.web.cern.ch.
[115] K. Cranmer et al., Analysis Preservation and Systematic Reinterpre-
tation within the ATLAS experiment, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. 1085 (2018)
042011.

