2
2
0
2

g
u
A
3

]

O
R
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
6
8
1
0
.
8
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

MixNet: Structured Deep Neural Motion Prediction
for Autonomous Racing

Phillip Karle1∗, Ferenc T¨or¨ok1, Maximilian Geisslinger1, Markus Lienkamp
Institute of Automotive Technology (FTM)
Technical University of Munich
Garching, Germany

Abstract

Reliably predicting the motion of contestant vehicles surrounding an autonomous racecar
is crucial for eﬀective and performant planning. Although highly expressive, deep neural
networks are black-box models, making their usage challenging in safety-critical applications,
such as autonomous driving. In this paper, we introduce a structured way of forecasting
the movement of opposing racecars with deep neural networks. The resulting set of possible
output trajectories is constrained. Hence quality guarantees about the prediction can be
given. We report the performance of the model by evaluating it together with an LSTM-
based encoder-decoder architecture on data acquired from high-ﬁdelity Hardware-in-the-
Loop simulations. The proposed approach outperforms the baseline regarding the prediction
accuracy but still fulﬁlls the quality guarantees. Thus, a robust real-world application of
the model is proven. The presented model was deployed on the racecar of the Technical
University of Munich for the Indy Autonomous Challenge 2021. The code used in this
research is available as open-source software at www.github.com/TUMFTM/MixNet.

1

Introduction

Developing reliable autonomous vehicles has various purposes, including safer, more relaxing, and more
eﬃcient traveling. To fuel innovation in the ﬁeld, autonomous vehicle competitions such as the DARPA
Grand Challenge (Buehler et al., 2007), Formula Student2 and Roborace3 have taken place. There is,
however, an aspect of autonomous racing that has not been covered before: full-scale multi-vehicle racing
against other competitors. The Indy Autonomous Challenge (IAC) and its successor, the Autonomous
Challenge at the CES 20224 (AC@CES) were meant to take this enormous next step. In the competition,
the teams were provided with the same hardware and developed their own autonomous software stacks.
Wheel-to-wheel racing poses serious challenges, which are also present in everyday road traﬃc. To operate
safely and eﬃciently in a dynamic environment, the vehicle has to predict the future motion of other dynamic
objects. Usually, the methods tackling this problem take the motion histories of the objects together with
some environmental information and make predictions conditioned on these. Several solutions use the current
estimated state of the vehicle and extrapolate it using a physics-based model (Ammoun and Nashashibi, 2009;
Xie et al., 2017; Deo et al., 2018; Schubert et al., 2008). Although these methods are appealing due to their

∗corresponding author
1phillip.karle@tum.de, ferenc.toeroek@tum.de, maximilian.geisslinger@tum.de
2https://www.imeche.org/events/formula-student/team-information/fs-ai
3https://roborace.com/
4https://www.indyautonomouschallenge.com/

 
 
 
 
 
 
transparency and small computational demands, the predictions become less reliable in the long term. Other
approaches, which we will cover in detail, use machine learning techniques to match the motions of the objects
to motion or behavior patterns and forecast accordingly. These methods often provide long-term predictions
up to 8 s and are more expressive. On the other hand, the approximators used are often black-box models
and hence performance or quality guarantees are hard to give.

The prediction algorithm developed for the race has to fulﬁll some prerequisites: 1) it should output a single
trajectory for each object; 2) the prediction horizon should be 5 s long; 3) the available time window for
calculation is 20 ms with a single CPU core of computing capacity available; 4) it should be robust against
noise in the inputs; 5) The output should always be smooth and should lie inside the racetrack. The available
input information consists of the motion histories of the objects and the map of the racetrack. Our approach
to fulﬁll these requirements is shown in Figure 1. We propose a structured deep neural motion forecasting
model. The approach, although deep learning-based, creates trajectory prediction in a structured way. The
object’s past movement is encoded by Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) and transferred into a latent
space. In contrast to common approaches, which determine the future trajectory in the decoder step entirely
by deep neural network, MixNet calculates weighting parameters for superposition of dynamically feasible
base curves derived from the track. By this, the MixNet is capable of providing strong quality guarantees for
its predictions, which enables real-world application in a broad range of scenarios. An illustrative example
is given in Figure 2. MixNet outputs a prediction based on the encoded scenario understanding with high
accuracy together with a smooth trajectory shape. In comparison, the benchmark model, which has the
same encoder architecture, i.e., incorporates the same scenario understanding, but determines the prediction
by means of a LSTM-based decoder cannot guarantee a stable output, so especially on a long prediction
horizon the predicted trajectory gets noisy. Besides that, our approach comprises the feature of fusing
external velocity information and overriding the calculated velocity proﬁle. By this, the model can be further
constrained, which are essential feature for a safe real-world application and useful to apply the model to a
new Operational Design Domain (ODD). Besides that, an implemented fuzzy logic that models overtaking
maneuvers improves the interaction-awareness to resolve non-feasible colliding trajectory predictions.

The structure of the paper is as follows. In Section 2 we summarize the main research directions in the
ﬁeld of motion prediction for autonomous driving and discuss the applicability for our purpose regarding the
aforementioned prerequisites. In Section 3 we introduce our approach of the MixNet and additional features
that cover the velocity fusion, safety checks and interaction-awareness. Besides that, we present our recorded
dataset and the training procedure. Then in Section 4 we evaluate its performance compared to the baseline
model and analyze its robustness against noisy input and the superpositioning weights.
In Section 5 we
discuss future research directions based on the shown results. Finally, in Section 6, we conclude our work
and outline the scope of the paper.

Figure 1: Overview of the MixNet prediction module. It combines a comprehensive, learned scenario un-
derstanding by means of an RNN-encoder and semantic knowledge to constrain the output by base curves
extracted from the track map.

Object TrackingMapPlausibilityCheckBase curvesInteraction Model𝝆𝟏𝝆𝟐𝝆𝟑𝝆𝟒Figure 2: Exemplary data sample. The inputs to the MixNet, which are object history and sampled track
boundaries, and the diﬀerent prediction modes of a rail-based approach, the benchmark model and the
MixNet are shown. MixNet combines the best of two worlds: the superposition of continuous base curves
and the comprehensive, learned scenario understanding.

2 Related Work

To give an overview of the state of the art in the ﬁeld of motion prediction, we structure this section as
proposed in (Karle et al., 2022). Accordingly, the methods are categorized based on the related investigation
methodology, how to describe the object’s motion, into physics-based, pattern-based, and planning-based
approaches. After introducing the methods for motion prediction in general, we discuss the applicability for
autonomous racing in the last subsection. For further details about the overall state of the art of software
for autonomous vehicle racing the reader is referred to (Betz et al., 2022b).

2.1 Physics-Based Approaches

In non-interactive scenarios with independent vehicle behavior and for short-term prediction up to 2 s, the
application of kinematics- or dynamics-based vehicle models is a suitable choice (Thrun et al., 2006). Most
commonly, deterministic or probabilistic kinematic models are propagated forward using a constant input
assumption. One can choose various longitudinal and turning-related signals to be the input. Hence models
with constant velocity, acceleration, turning radius and steering angle or the combination of these can be
obtained. Schubert et al. (Schubert et al., 2008) provide a review of these models and conclude that Constant
Turning Radius and Acceleration (CTRA) models provide the best compromise between prediction accuracy
and computational demands. To incorporate uncertainty information, Bayesian Filters, especially K´alm´an
Filters (Kalman, 1960) are commonly used. If the linearity assumption of the K´alm´an Filter does not hold,
the Extended (EKF) or Unscented (UKF) versions are applied. By means of an Interaction Multiple Model
(IMM) various kinematic models can be combined based on heuristics to improve the expressiveness in
heterogeneous scenarios (Barrios and Motai, 2011).
Another physics-based approach are reachable set predictions (Koschi and Althoﬀ, 2017), which utilize the
set of physically possible behaviors. Thus all possible trajectories within the dynamic limits are determined,
which are covered by a convex hull. Considering only the trajectories allowed by the traﬃc rules can limit
the solution space accordingly and allows the use in a real vehicle for online veriﬁcation (Pek et al., 2020).
For the use in autonomous racing, these types of predictions are too conservative for the long-term prediction
due to the wide range of driving dynamics of the racing vehicle and the lack of explicit rules as in road traﬃc.
The application of the online veriﬁcation concept in a supervisor module with the use case of autonomous
racing is shown in (Stahl et al., 2020).
In general, physics-based methods are computationally cheap and their operation is transparent and well
studied, which makes them appealing in safety-critical application domains such as autonomous driving. The
main limitation arises from the simpliﬁed input assumption. This results in fairly accurate predictions on the
short horizon. However, the prediction gets quickly outdated in the long term (>2 s) as the assumption of
constant movement does not hold anymore. Hence, these methods are often combined with other approaches
which tend to produce more reliable long-term predictions (Xie et al., 2017; Deo et al., 2018).

−400−300−200−1000100200300xinm−2400−2350yinmHistoryBoundaryGroundTruthRail-basedPredictionBenchmarkModelMixNet2.2 Pattern-Based Approaches

Pattern-based approaches build on the idea of taking observations of an object, matching it to a pattern,
and carrying out the prediction based on it. The pattern assigned to a vehicle can be handcrafted or learned.
Furthermore, patterns can be learned in physical by clustering data points or in an abstract space such as
the hidden representations of Encoder-decoder models. Most of these methods are data-based approaches,
hence the need for suﬃciently rich datasets is inherent.

When using handcrafted patterns, the motion of an object is assigned to one of the predeﬁned maneuver
classes. Then, the output prediction is constructed considering the assigned maneuver type and usually
involves the usage of prototypes. The classiﬁcation can be carried out based on heuristics (Houenou et al.,
2013) or ML models, such as Support Vector Machines (SVMs) (Mandalia and Salvucci, 2005), Hidden
Markov Models (HMMs) (Yuan et al., 2018; Li et al., 2019b; Bicego et al., 2004) or RNNs (Khosroshahi
et al., 2016). HMMs and RNNs are commonly used due to their inherent capability of interpreting the
temporal evolution of a motion history. Instead of using handcrafted patterns, it is also possible to learn
clusters from data. Afterwards, a single prototype trajectory (Morris and Trivedi, 2011) or a probabilistic
representation (Kr¨uger et al., 2019) is obtained for each cluster. During inference time, the output is
constructed by classifying the given scenario into a speciﬁc cluster and applying the respective representant.

Encoder-decoder neural network architectures have recently shown huge potential for motion prediction
tasks by dominating the leaderboards of various prediction challenges on public real-world datasets (Chang
et al., 2019; Caesar et al., 2020). For the use case of motion prediction, the encoder creates a latent
summary about the motion history of an object and the environment information, which serves as an
abstract pattern of the scenario. Conditioned on this abstract representation, the decoder determines the
future movement of the object. The encoder and the decoder models can both be based on Convolutional
Neural Networks (Harmening et al., 2020; Ridel et al., 2020), RNNs (Sadeghian et al., 2018; Li et al., 2019a)
or even Convolutional-RNNs (Xingjian et al., 2015; Ridel et al., 2020).

Attention mechanisms are also commonly used, to allow the network to focus on the relevant parts of the
input (Sadeghian et al., 2018; Li et al., 2019a) or to take interactions between vehicles into account (Mercat
et al., 2020). Alternatively, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) can be used to model interactions in a non-
euclidean space. A learned graph representation of the scene is applied to model individual interaction
between the single agents. The application on public real-world datasets shows a signiﬁcant improvement
in prediction performance (Salzmann et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2020). Another advantage of graph-based
prediction models is the more eﬃcient representation in contrast to grid-based approaches, which leads to a
reduced calculation time (Gao et al., 2020). The bottleneck to provide a suﬃciently rich dataset to train a
performant algorithm is mitigated in terms of Encoder-decoder architectures due to the fact that no labeled
data is needed to create a dataset. The reason for this is that the observation of an object’s movement
serves as ground truth for output of the prediction algorithm. Thus, the trajectories can simply be split into
history and ground truth prediction parts and used in the self-supervised learning setup (Geisslinger et al.,
2021).

2.3 Planning-Based Approaches

Planning-based approaches consider objects to be rational agents acting in an environment according to
their hidden policies in order to reach their goals. The basis of planning-based approaches is the Markov
Decision Process (MDP). The approaches usually diﬀer from each other in approximating diﬀerent parts of
the MDP. One approach is to derive handcrafted cost functions to model the agent’s behavior (Rudenko et al.,
2018). However, the creation of a comprehensive cost function and rule set requires dedicated knowledge
and complex traﬃc scenarios are challenging to represent. Alternatively, the driving behavior can be learned
from data, which refers to the ﬁeld of learning from demonstration. On the one hand, it is possible to apply
Inverse Reinforcement Learning, which aims to derive a cost function that ﬁts the observed expert behavior
(Sun et al., 2018; Deo and Trivedi, 2020; Fernando et al., 2020). On the other hand, in the case of Imitation

Learning the policy is directly learned from the observed data, i.e., the observation is directly related to a
speciﬁc behavior (Mayank Bansal et al., 2019). To enhance the robustness of the learned policy generative
methods are used, one common approach is Generative Adversarial Imitational Learning (Kueﬂer et al.,
2017).

Both pattern-based and planning-based approaches are usually capable of producing more reliable long-term
predictions compared to physics-based methods because more comprehensive features can be inputted to the
model to consider interaction between diﬀerent road users and map constraints. Their shortcomings come
from the fact that these methods are primarily data-based and rely on learned policies or patterns. Hence,
their performance highly depends on the underlying dataset, which has to represent the ODD suﬃciently.
Besides the amount of data, the balance of scenario types inﬂuences the prediction performance in edge
cases such as safety-critical situations. So, the under-representation of these scenarios directly impacts the
applicability. The application in combination with safeguarding methods is also challenging as data-based
methods lack of explainability. Hence their behavior can not be supervised properly.

2.4 Applicability for Autonomous Racing

In the following the state of the art is evaluated regarding the applicability for autonomous racing.
In
our case we focus on the Indy Autonomous Challenge (IAC), one of the most advanced autonomous racing
series, which is the target for the presented approach. In the inaugural edition the IAC was held on the
Indianapolis Motor Speedway (IMS) and the Las Vegas Motor Speedway (LVMS), which are both oval circuits
with additional simulation races in advance. The circuits do not oﬀer any lanes to deﬁne lane-keeping or
lane-changing maneuvers. Also, overtaking can have many diﬀerent forms because the lane layout does not
constrain it as in normal road traﬃc and it is assumed to be non-cooperative. Besides these constraints
resulting from the race format, it also has to be considered that no public race dataset is available and the
execution time on ﬁxed computational resources has to fulﬁll real-time requirements. Due to the overall
software concept (Betz et al., 2022a), it is required to provide a prediction horizon of 5 s, which is another
important constraint. In consideration of missing traﬃc lanes, the prediction length does not allow the usage
of purely physics-based methods as constant movement assumptions do not hold and the set of dynamically
reachable states gets too large. The factors of missing lane information and data discourage the application
of classiﬁcation or clustering-based approaches. The application of planning-based algorithms is questionable
because these algorithms require even more comprehensive data to derive the expert behavior properly and,
especially in terms of IL, the robustness towards outliers is not given.

The design factors that motivate our approach, the MixNet, is to combine data-based encoding with dy-
namically feasible superposition of base curves are the real-time capability and the need for robustness and
performance guarantees. By means of the Encoder network we can extract patterns from observation. These
patterns cover comprehensive object behavior, so complex scenarios can be modeled. The superposition of
base curves in the decoder constrains the possible prediction to lie inside the race track and it guarantees
robustness in case of outliers in the input. Thus, the applicability can be enhanced signiﬁcantly. However,
the superposition of base curves is still ﬂexible enough to output a high prediction accuracy as the evaluation
(section 4) shows. To model interactions and to output collision-free predictions a rule-based fuzzy logic is
implemented which can be applied to the MixNet’s output.

3 Method

In this section, we introduce MixNet, our encoder-decoder neural network architecture for motion prediction.
Besides the network architecture, we additionally describe how to incorporate external velocity information,
trigger safety interventions and model interactions between objects. Finally, we describe the data mining
and training procedure.

3.1 Network Architecture

The proposed network architecture of the MixNet is shown in Figure 3. The LSTM layers in the encoder
create a latent summary through encoding the object motion histories. The inputs to the network are the
H = 30 historic 2D-positions up to 3 s in the past, sampled with f = 10 Hz. Besides that, the relevant
map information, which are the left and right track boundaries starting from the current object’s position,
equidistantly sampled in vector representation, is inputted to the network. Considering the expected racing
speed and prediction horizon, we sample the boundaries up to a horizon of 400 m with 20 m. During inference
N objects are fed into the network batch wise. Figure 2 shows an exemplary input consisting of history
and track boundaries. The hidden states of the encoding LSTMs are then concatenated and passed to a
linear layer, which outputs the latent representation of the scenario. The decoder, the generative part of
the model, creates a prediction conditioned on the latent summary. In contrast to other works, the future
states are not the direct output of an LSTM network, but the forecast trajectory is generated systematically
from known schemes. First of all, the trajectory is obtained by predicting a path and applying a velocity
proﬁle to it. Both of these components are generated in a constrained way. The path is created through
superpositioning various predeﬁned base curves according to weights predicted by the network. The velocity
proﬁle is piece-wise linear and is determined by predicting an initial velocity and ﬁve constant acceleration
values: one for each second of the prediction horizon. The ﬁnal output trajectory is obtained by resampling
the path according to the velocity proﬁle. In this way, the set of possible output trajectories is constrained
by construction.

We use four base curves for superpositioning: the two track boundaries, a pre-computed minimal curvature
raceline (Heilmeier et al., 2019) and the centerline of the track. The curves are represented by discrete
2D-points of equal number. The points of the boundaries and the raceline are deﬁned by their distances
from the centerline points. Hence, the points of each curve at any index i correspond to the same cross
section on the track. Due to this fact, the superpositioned curve can be obtained as follows:

ρsup(s) =

(cid:88)

c∈C

λcρc(s) with

λc

∈

[0, 1]

c
∀

∈ C

and

(cid:88)

c∈C

λc = 1

(1)

(2)

where ρsup(s) is the superposed curve along the arc length s of the track with base curves ρc(s) and their
corresponding weights λc in the set of base curves
. Due to the fact that all base curves are sampled along the
same cross sections, s is equal for all base curves. Equation 2 provides the constraints for the superpositioning
weights, which result in curves that lie between the left and right boundaries. These constraints can easily
be enforced by applying the softmax activation to the output of the linear layer.

C

Figure 3: The architecture of MixNet. The prediction is composed of a path prediction by superposition of
base curves and the prediction of an acceleration proﬁle to apply a piece-wise linear velocity proﬁle. Inputs
to the network are H = 30 past 2D-positions of N objects and the related left and right track boundaries
in driving direction in vector representation. Output is the trajectory prediction of N objects in 2D with a
horizon of F = 50 steps.

LSTMLeakyReLULSTMLeakyReLULinearReLULSTMLeakyReLULSTMTanhLinearSigmoidLinearSoftMaxVelocityProﬁleCalculationSuperpositionofpredeﬁnedcurvesTrajectoryPredictionHistoryRightBoundaryLeftBoundaryInputEncoderDecoderOutputN×B×2N×H×2N×B×2N×F×2InterpolationweightsInitialvelocityAccelerationsWe emphasize that this method does not guarantee that a predicted trajectory starts exactly from the actual
position of a vehicle, but a lateral oﬀset can occur. This is due to the fact that the superposition weights by
Equation 1 are constant along the path and the model is trained to output a prediction with the smallest
overall error along the prediction horizon. Hence, a lateral oﬀset at the beginning of the predicted path
is possible. To remedy this issue, during the ﬁrst second of the motion, we apply a plausibility check to
the output of the network by means of a comparison between the current object position and the predicted
path. Above a speciﬁed threshold, a correcting shift is triggered to ensure a consistent transition between the
current position and the predicted path. Especially in transient scenarios, this characteristic is beneﬁcial:
If the current motion of the vehicle is strongly transversal, the network learns to predict a path that ﬁts
the later parts of the ground truth better by sacriﬁcing accuracy at the beginning of the horizon. With
the application of the correction shift, the consistency of the predicted motion is secured, so an additional
quality guarantee can be given. During inference, if an adjustment of the the ﬁrst part of the trajectory is
triggered to connect the actual position to the prediction path, trajectories similar to lane-change maneuvers
can be obtained.

3.2 Velocity Information Fusion

A further advantage of the modular trajectory prediction is that it can also incorporate velocity information
from another source to fuse it with the outputted path of the network. The proposed implementation of
the MixNet oﬀers two possibilities for incorporating external velocity information. First, one can take the
complete velocity proﬁle from an external source and use it instead of the one predicted by MixNet. The
other possibility is to predict the piece-wise constant accelerations with MixNet but use the external velocity
information only to determine the current velocity as initialization.

A reliable source of such information is object tracking which contains the ﬁltered states of the surrounding
vehicles. While the current velocity can be extracted from the tracked object’s state independently from
the ODD a complete velocity proﬁle underlies speciﬁc assumptions. For our use case of autonomous racing
on a closed track, we propose to determine a complete velocity proﬁle along the whole prediction horizon
by forward propagating the tracked object’s state by means of the underlying state-space model. However,
this assumption is limited to scenarios with objects at race speed. Experimental evaluation shows that
the combination of the tracked initial velocity and the piece-wise constant acceleration predicted by the
MixNet provides the most accurate velocity proﬁle predictions. Hence, similar to the path prediction, the
combination of an external constraint by means of the initial velocity and the scenario-aware data-based
acceleration prediction performs best.

3.3 Safety Override Possibility

Predicting accurately at the beginning of the horizon is a safety-relevant issue. On the other hand, large
inaccuracies towards the end of the prediction horizon lead to ineﬃcient planning and hence bad performance
during the race. Due to the constant superposition weights, this trade-oﬀ especially occurs at the turn-in
point and during overtaking maneuvers. To solve this conﬂict, our prediction method recognizes and overrides
dynamically infeasible predictions, that is, predictions which have a large lateral oﬀset at the beginning of
the horizon. Accordingly, our goal is to probabilistically identify the cases where this happens. Our measure
of probability for having generated an initially highly inaccurate forecast is based on the raw path prediction
output of the MixNet and the actual state of the vehicle. As stated before, without adjustment, the predicted
path does not necessarily start at the actual position of the object. Thus, if the predicted path lies too far
from the vehicle considering its actual position and orientation, the prediction is identiﬁed as invalid. In this
case, we override it with a prediction approach, which we call rail-based prediction. This approach is derived
from the tracked object state and oﬀers a high robustness and guarantees kinematic consistency with the
current object’s state, which is of high importance as fallback option. The rail-based prediction is composed
out of a separate path and velocity proﬁle. The path is sampled starting from the current object position in
parallel to the track boundaries. The velocity proﬁle is determined by forward propagation of the state-space

model as described in 3.2. An exemplary prediction by means of the rail-based approach is shown in Figure
2. It can be seen that the rail-based prediction is consistent and accurate at the beginning of the prediction
horizon, but has a high lateral error on the long-term horizon.

3.4

Interaction Modeling

As it can be seen in Figure 3 no information about surrounding race cars is fed into the neural network.
Hence, there is no explicit interaction-awareness given by the model. Although this assumption holds for
many race scenarios with cars following their raceline, interactive scenarios such as overtaking or blocking,
which are highly interactive, require additional modeling. In the literature, these interactions are modeled
using game theory (Smirnov et al., 2021) or learned by a prediction network (Deo and Trivedi, 2018). These
approaches have the disadvantage that they either require a lot of computing time due to iterations or require
a vast amount of relevant data with interactions.

Therefore, we propose a two-step approach for trajectory prediction on the racetrack. This ﬁrst predicts
each vehicle by itself and then adjusts the predicted trajectories based on interactions in a second step. In
doing so, we take advantage of the set of rules in motorsports. Similar to other racing series such as Formula
1, for safety reasons the movement options of an overtaken vehicle are restricted by the rule set. In the Indy
Autonomous Challenge, the vehicle in front is even forced to ”hold its raceline” (Network, 2019). In other
words, it may not block the overtaking vehicle or initiate other unpredictable maneuvers.

Our approach is to predict each vehicle individually, including the ego-vehicle, as a ﬁrst step. Subsequently, all
existing predicted trajectories of the diﬀerent vehicles are examined for collisions. If no collision is detected,
we assume that the inﬂuence of the interaction is minor and no adjustment of the trajectories is necessary.
However, if at least one collision is detected, we do adapt the trajectories to account for interactions. For
this, we examine the race order for each collision and adjust the predicted trajectory of the rear vehicle,
since the front vehicle is not allowed to adjust its behavior according to the rules.

To adjust the predicted trajectory, a high-level decision is ﬁrst made: the faster rear vehicle will either
overtake on the left, overtake on the right or not overtake at all and stay behind the front vehicle. This
high-level decision is made by a fuzzy logic that takes into account the absolute and relative positions as
well as the velocities of the participants. According to the decision, the predicted trajectory is adjusted
laterally (in case of an overtake) or longitudinally (in case of no overtake). The adjusted trajectories do
not necessarily have to be collision-free, since new collisions with other predicted trajectories may occur.
Therefore, the procedure can be repeated as often as necessary until all predictions are resolved collision-free
or a termination criterion occurs. In our application, it has proven to be useful in a second iteration to
ensure only that the ego vehicle is collision-free with vehicles in the rear. Otherwise it could happen that
the trajectory planning tries to avoid this collision and even makes room for an overtaking vehicle, which
would be contrary to winning the race.

3.5 Dataset

An essential part of successful Machine Learning applications is a rich dataset, which covers a diverse set of
scenarios expected during inference. However, since this race is the ﬁrst of its kind, building a dataset from
previous races is not possible. Also, there is no public racing dataset available. In this respect, one of the
key challenges to be solved is building a dataset for training our neural network approach.

Real-life data was not available until the last weeks before the race itself since real-world tests on the IMS
track only took place then. Hence, training data had to be acquired through simulating our software pipeline
(Betz et al., 2022a) against itself on a high ﬁdelity Hardware-in-the-Loop (HIL) simulator. The HIL-simulator
is able to simulate the full autonomous software stack of up to ten agents in real-time with the same interfaces
and callback functions as on the real vehicle. The only constraint is a simpliﬁed perception input to reduce

the computation load, i.e., the perception pipelines are bypassed with a synthetic object list generator that is
input to the tracking module. However, this generator comprises various features to imitate real perception
behavior such as limited sensor range and ﬁeld-of-view, addition of Gaussian and normal noise, variation
of measured objects states and the simulation of false positives and false negatives. Multi-vehicle races
on the HIL-simulator and data from the oﬃcial simulation race of the IAC, both with highly interactive
and complex scenarios, are the basis of our dataset. The recorded logs contain the output of the tracking
module, which are used to recreate the trajectories of each vehicle during a race. Using the tracking module
output to build our dataset has the advantage that the training input distribution of tracked objects and
tracking quality will be as close as possible to the expected input distribution during the race. Besides that,
the synthetic object list generator is used to vary the perception quality with the aforementioned features
to augment the dataset. We added Gaussian noise during the data generation process with mean µ = 0
and diﬀerent variance in longitudinal and lateral directions based on the evaluated perception and tracking
performance.

From these recovered trajectories and the map of the racetrack, it is possible to generate a dataset for
training the model. As it was stated before, the input of our model consists of the (x, y) positions of the
history trajectory and the track boundaries around and ahead of the vehicle. Before inputting these points
to the model, they are transformed into a local coordinate system, which has its origin at the left boundary
next to the current object position and is oriented with its x-axis tangential to the left boundary. With the
process above we managed to recreate 1,569 trajectories from 226 races with in average 3.4 vehicles per race.
From these trajectories, we created 358,025 input-output data pairs.

3.6 Training

The loss function we deﬁned for training has two terms, one for costing the ﬁt of the interpolated curve,
which relates to the error in lateral direction, and one for the velocity proﬁle, which reﬂects the accuracy in
the longitudinal direction. The loss Lpath related to the lateral deviation of the interpolated curve ˆx from
the ground truth x is costed with a Weighted Mean Square Error (WMSE) at the beginning of the curve as
follows:

Lpath =

1
F

(Lwmse + Lmse)

Lwmse =

k
(cid:88)

( ˆxi

i=1

xi)2

−

(cid:18)

1 + w

(cid:18)
1

i

−
k

−

(cid:19)(cid:19)

1

Lmse =

F
(cid:88)

( ˆxi

i=k+1

xi)2

−

with w = 0.5, k = 10, F = 50

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

The WMSE decreases linearly from the ﬁrst prediction step with an additional weight w along the weighting
horizon k. The remaining prediction horizon is weighted with 1.0, which corresponds to the conventional
Mean Square Error (MSE). The weighting turned out to be beneﬁcial to limit the lateral oﬀset at the
beginning of the prediction, even if an additional correction shift is applied at inference. The loss of the
velocity proﬁle is also the MSE coming from comparing it to that of the ground truth velocity proﬁle. The
overall loss L is then obtained from the path loss Lpath and the velocity loss Lvel as follows:

L = Lpath + ∆t2

Lvel

·

(7)

Where ∆t = 1/f = 0.1 s is the timestep size of the prediction in seconds. The multiplication of the velocity
error with ∆t2 comes from the following intuition: The velocity error ev results through integration in a

·

ev displacement error and a ∆t2

∆t
the relation e2
add two loss terms of an identical unit, which is m2.

e2
v squared displacement error, if the MSE is applied. By considering
Lvel, it follows that multiplying the velocity loss term with ∆t2 is necessary to be able to

v ∼

·

The hyperparameters are optimized by Bayesian optimization (Nogueira, 2014). To train the network we use
10−5 with a rate decay of 0.997 per epoch. The L2 weight regularization has a strength
a learning rate of 5
of 10−7 and we use a batch size of 128. We train the model for 50 epochs and take the model with the best
validation for the evaluation presented in Section 4. The ﬁnal net and training parameters are published in
the open source code.

·

In conclusion, the proposed method oﬀers guarantees that the predicted trajectories are always smooth
and lie inside the racetrack by means of the structured composition of the prediction. Besides that it is
possible to fuse velocity information from other sources such as the state estimation to enhance the kinematic
consistency of the predicted trajectory. Finally, it is possible to probabilistically detect predictions that are
highly incorrect at the beginning of the horizon. In these cases, it is possible to override the predictions. For
autonomous racing on a closed track, we propose to use a rail-based prediction, which outputs a constant
velocity trajectory in parallel to the track boundaries starting from the current object’s position.

4 Experiments

In this section, we describe the test procedure, which comprises details about the test dataset and present a
comprehensive evaluation of MixNet’s prediction performance. The conducted experiments reveal the overall
prediction performance and analyzes the model’s robustness. Besides that, we investigate the composition
of the base curves.

4.1 Test procedure

The set of predictions that are reachable through MixNet is constrained. This is exactly what allows for the
quality guarantees mentioned before. To demonstrate that, despite this boundedness, MixNet is still ﬂexible
enough to output an accurate prediction, we compare its performance to a purely LSTM-based encoder-
decoder architecture, which we deﬁne as benchmark model. The benchmark model’s encoder architecture is
identical to MixNet’s. The diﬀerence lies in the decoder architecture, which is in case of the benchmark model
also constructed with LSTM-layers. Thus, the model directly iteratively outputs a 2D trajectory prediction
with a shape of F x 2 for N objects. MixNet and the benchmark model have 198, 214 and 193, 797 trainable
parameters respectively. We train both models on the same dataset which is described in subsection 3.5.
For MixNet, we incorporate initial velocity information from object tracking into the velocity proﬁle, but
use the piece-wise constant acceleration outputted by the MixNet.

For reproducibility, we have recorded 10 scenarios on our HIL simulator. These include interactive race
scenarios with diﬀerent numbers of vehicles with various speed limits. The recordings can be replayed
identically to the pipelines using the two prediction models. For the recording of the interactive scenarios,
we used MixNet as the prediction model to run the full software stack. We would like to emphasize that this
does not induce any bias in the evaluation process as the respective planning behavior of each objects diﬀers
from the MixNet model behavior. We report the performances of the models by analyzing the absolute error
distributions in the lateral and longitudinal directions with respect to the horizon length using the Mean
Average Error (MAE), which is deﬁned as follows:

MAE =

1
F

F
(cid:88)

i=1

ˆxi

|

xi

2

|

−

(8)

4.2 Overall Prediction Performance

The overall MAE on the recorded interactive scenarios of MixNet and the benchmark model are 4.91 m and
5.36 m respectively. The reason why MixNet, although being constrained, outperforms the benchmark model
becomes apparent when we look at the lateral and longitudinal error distributions on the prediction horizon
illustrated in Figure 4. As it can be seen, the magnitude of errors in the lateral direction is very similar in
the two cases. This result justiﬁes the hypothesis that obtaining the prediction path by superpositioning
our chosen base curves covers the set of possible trajectories properly. The superiority of MixNet in the
overall error comes from the fact that it produces smaller errors in the longitudinal direction. Thus, it can
be concluded that the combination of the initial velocity from the tracking module and the assumption of
piece-wise constant acceleration models the longitudinal movement of the objects more accurate than the
iteratively determined output of the LSTM-decoder.

The error distributions with respect to the average velocity of the history are shown in Figure 5a. The
predictions are separated into the three bins v < 30 m s−1, 30 m s−1 < v < 60 m s−1 and 60 m s−1 < v
based on the average velocity of their histories, which are associated with a slow-speed and start scenario
range, a mid-speed range and a top-speed range. As Figure 5a shows, the models have similar characteristics
regarding their velocity dependent accuracy. The mean error is the highest at low speeds and it gradually
decreases as the velocity grows. There are two main reasons for this. Firstly, most of the transient scenarios
like start scenarios, which are challenging to predict, happen at lower speeds. Once the cars have reached
their normal racing speed, the scenarios tend to be more steady in the longitudinal direction. Secondly,
since most of the racing happens at high speeds, the majority of the training data could be acquired in
this velocity range. The number of vehicles does not have a large eﬀect on the accuracy of the predictions
(Figure 5b). This is due to the fact that the fuzzy logic can resolve prediction conﬂicts accurately by deciding
between right and left overtake. Moreover, maneuvers with more than two vehicles racing wheel-to-wheel at
the same time, which would result in strong lateral interaction, are rare. Instead, scenarios with more than
two vehicles mainly result in sequential overtaking maneuvers between two vehicles respectively.

4.3 Robustness

To investigate the robustness properties of both data-based approaches, we have replayed the test scenarios
with extra Gaussian noise added. It should be noted that the original test data is already noisy, but its
magnitude is much smaller. We carried out several experiments, all with zero-mean disturbances with
diﬀerent variances in the lateral and longitudinal directions. Table 1 reviews the MAEs of the approaches in
the diﬀerent test cases. As the analysis reveals, MixNet and the benchmark model are both robust against

Figure 4: Lateral (left) and longitudinal (right) error distribution on the prediction horizon. The solid and
dashed lines denote the median and mean errors respectively. The colored areas illustrate the range between
the Q1 and Q3 quartiles.

012345tpredins0.00.51.01.52.02.5MAEinmBenchmarkModelMixNet012345tpredins024681012MAEinmBenchmarkModelMixNet(a) Object velocity.

(b) Number of objects.

Figure 5: The error distributions of the benchmark model (orange) and the MixNet (blue).

the added noise in the chosen range, although performance degradation occurs. However, it can be noticed
that the MAE of the MixNet is lower in all cases. In the case of adding noise in lateral and longitudinal
direction, the MAE of the benchmark model increases less than that of the MixNet in case of a standard
deviation of 0.5 m in each direction. However, a bigger standard deviation of 1.0 m in both direction results
in a signiﬁcant increase in the MAE of the benchmark model by 21.2%. In contrast, the MixNet’s relative
increase in the MAE is only 13.4%. This observation indicates that the constraints applied to the MixNet
result in the desired model behavior that the model is more robust against variations of the input. The
application of Gaussian noise in only one direction reveals that the benchmark model is less sensitive in the
lateral direction. However, the relative increase in the MAE for both models is similar. The application of
Gaussian noise in the longitudinal direction clearly shows a big advantage of the MixNet. The incorporation
of external velocity information from the tracking module results in a signiﬁcantly more robust prediction
accuracy as the relative increase in the MAE is only half as big as in the case of the benchmark model.

Table 1: Robustness of the the benchmark model and MixNet against zero-mean Gaussian noise.

Standard Deviation
σlon in m σlat in m abs. MAE in m rel. MAE in % abs. MAE in m rel. MAE in %

Benchmark Model

MixNet

0.0
0.5
1.0
0.0
1.0

0.0
0.5
1.0
1.0
0.0

5.36
5.61
6.50
5.76
6.09

-
+4.6
+21.2
+7.5
+13.6

4.91
5.23
5.57
5.39
5.29

-
+6.5
+13.4
+9.7
+7.7

<3030−6060<vinm/s0.02.55.07.510.012.515.017.520.0MAEinmMeanMedian<3030−6060<vinm/s0.02.55.07.510.012.515.017.520.0MAEinmMeanMedian1234nveh0246810121416MAEinmMeanMedian1234nveh0246810121416MAEinmMeanMedian4.4 Superpositioning weights

To investigate how consistently MixNet predicts the weights for curve superpositioning, we input synthetic
history trajectories generated with random weights at the entrance of one of the turns on the racetrack. We
then observe how well the outputs of MixNet match the inputs. Figure 6 illustrates the input and output
weights of the four base curves in scatter plots.

Figure 6: The relation between the inputted superpositioning weights of the synthetically generated trajec-
tories and the outputted weights of MixNet.

Ideally, the model would output the exact same
weights with which the input history is built up re-
sulting in 45° straight lines in all of the plots. The
closest to this is the ﬁgure of the raceline weights.
Meanwhile, the centerline weights hardly seem to
correlate with the input at all. Generally, the net-
work seems to overuse the raceline. The reason for
that is that the trajectories in the data usually have
a strong raceline component. Hence, the network
often assumes raceline following, although the cur-
rent object might diﬀer from the raceline. Such an
example of raceline overuse can be seen in Figure 7.
In the turn, the prediction ﬁts the ground truth very
well close to the inner bound. However, in the turn
exit, the model assumes more optimal driving and a
lateral error occurs compared to the ground truth,
which follows a more narrow line. The example also
reveals that even though the same lateral position
at a speciﬁc point results, a diﬀerent combination
of superposition weights inﬂuences the overall pre-
diction path. As it can be derived from Equation 1
and 2 any point on the racetrack can be obtained
through inﬁnitely many diﬀerent weighting combi-
nations of the 4 base curves. Thus, in the shown
scenario, a higher weight of the left boundary would
result in the same lateral position in the turn, but
a diﬀerent, in this case the correct, position at the
turn exit.

Figure 7: Exemplary scenario with overuse of the race-
line in a turn.

Even though the superposition weights diﬀer from the inputted ones, the overall errors of the prediction are
very low in these synthetic cases. The fact that the centerline is underused indicates that this base curve

0.00.51.0λc,in0.00.51.0λc,outLeftBoundary0.00.51.0λc,in0.00.51.0λc,outRightBoundary0.00.51.0λc,in0.00.51.0λc,outCenterline0.00.51.0λc,in0.00.51.0λc,outRaceline100250400xinm−1200−1100−1000−900yinmGroundTruthPredictionRacelineHistoryis indeed redundant as it lies close to the middle between left and right boundary for the major part of the
track. Hence, we conduct the following analysis to prove this hypothesis and approximate the centerline as
follows:

ρcenter(s)

0.5

·

≈

ρlef t(s) + 0.5

ρright(s)

·

(9)

In this case, the weights corresponding to the centerline can be redistributed and added to the left and right
boundary weights without changing the overall superpositioned output as follows:

λlef t = λlef t + 0.5

λlef t = λlef t + 0.5

λcenter

λcenter

·

·

(10)

(11)

If we plot the left and right boundary weights again,
we get the input-output weight relationships illus-
trated in Figure 8. Here, the weights for the right
boundary already match very well the desired linear
ﬁgure. The left boundary is still mostly substituted
by over weighting the raceline. From this we con-
clude that the superpositioning weights produced by
the network, although they do not match exactly the
input weights, which is also not expected, due to the
redundancy of the base curves, are consequent and
reasonable.

4.5 Computation time

Figure 8: The relation between the input superposi-
tioning weights of the synthetically generated trajec-
tories and the outputted weights of MixNet if one re-
distributes the weights of the centerline to the right
and left boundaries.

The average computation times for predicting four
vehicles on a single core of an Intel i7-4720HQ 2.6
GHz CPU for MixNet is 9 ms and 15 ms for the benchmark model. The models have encoders of identical
sizes, but the LSTM-decoder of the benchmark model takes longer to execute due to iterative calculation of
the vehicles’ future trajectory, which is the reason for the higher calculation time. Even on a CPU-single
core the computation time is low enough that the model can be applied in a full software stack without
access to the GPU, which would reduce the computation time signiﬁcantly.

5 Future Work

An interesting future research direction could be to determine a richer set of base curves for superpositioning.
Including for example base curves which cover lateral motion on the track could result in even higher
expressiveness. Additionally, the ﬂexibility of the approach could be enhanced by outputting multiple weights
along the path instead of one constant set of weight parameters. Thus, the trade oﬀ between accurate
prediction towards the end of the prediction horizon and a low lateral oﬀset between the current object
position and the start of the predicted trajectory could be solved. However, both future directions require
more data and add complexity to the training process. Besides that the robustness for real-world application
has to be reviewed in case of the more ﬂexible network with varying superpositioning weights.

Moreover, interaction-awareness could be improved by directly incorporating surrounding objects in the
network input. The state of the art oﬀers various methods such as grid-based methods or GNNs to model
interactions. Our presented rule-base approach is robust and explainable and performances well with a low
number of cars (< 4). However, the scalability of the approach is limited because the sequential application
of the rule-base overtaking decision results in an increasing number of prediction collisions, when aplied to
a higher number of vehicles.

0.00.51.0λc,in0.00.51.0λc,outLeftBoundary0.00.51.0λc,in0.00.51.0λc,outRightBoundaryAnother idea that would be worth investigating is how the knowledge of MixNet could be generalized to
previously unseen tracks. Although the predicted path can be constrained by choosing the respective base
lines to lie inside them, the learned scenario understanding depends on the applied base curves. This can be
explained by the fact that the network itself does not know the base curves, hence the forecasts on another
racetrack, which inherently comes with diﬀerent base curves, would not result in meaningful forecasts. This
shortcoming, however, could be remedied if the base curves would also be input to the model. Another
option enhance the generalization capabilities is to build a modular network with a a backbone network with
a general motion encoding, which is trained on a large scale dataset and a track speciﬁc head.

Lastly, we would like to draw the attention to an additional feature of MixNet that could be further explored.
Namely, that the path predicted does not only exists in the future. Superpositioning the base curves according
to the predicted weights results in a path that covers a complete lap on the track. Hence, it also exists behind
the current position of the vehicle. This means, that the predicted path can directly be compared to the
history trajectory of an object. This can be useful for example in obtaining a conﬁdence value for each
forecast. It is somewhat similar to what we have exploited when we ﬁltered and overrode forecasts which
were identiﬁed as potentially incorrect at the beginning of the horizon. However, instead of using only the
most resent position of the vehicle, one could use all the historical states and hence get a picture of how well
the predicted path ﬁts the observed history of the car.

6 Conclusion

Autonomous driving has been an emerging research ﬁeld in the past few decades. To fuel innovation,
autonomous car races have been and are being organized. The ﬁrst high-speed wheel-to-wheel competition
was the Indy Autonomous Challenge. This paper described the motion prediction algorithm of the team
TUM Autonomous Motorsport developed for this race.

Our solution is an encoder-decoder neural network architecture, called MixNet, which carries out the motion
prediction task in a structured manner. The encoder part of the network creates a latent summary from the
history trajectories and some relevant map information. The decoder then creates a path by superpositioning
predeﬁned base curves with weights predicted by the network. It also generates a piece-wise linear velocity
proﬁle, according to which the path is resampled to reach the output trajectory. By this, the approach is
capable to combine a comprehensive scenario understanding of the RNN-encoder network and constrained,
thus robust, prediction output superposed by kinematically feasible base curves.

The main contribution of this work is the development of a structured deep neural motion prediction algo-
rithm that allows giving some quality guarantees about its output. The predicted trajectories are guaranteed
to be smooth and lie inside the racetrack. Meanwhile these guarantees can be given, thanks to the highly
restricted prediction set and the method is still ﬂexible enough to produce accurate predictions in the major-
ity of the cases. Also, since the velocity proﬁle is predicted separately, it is possible to incorporate velocity
information from other sources, such as the object tracking module’s state estimator ﬁlters. Furthermore,
it is possible to detect predictions that are probably inaccurate at the beginning of the horizon. These
predictions could easily lead to dangerous behavior, hence ﬁltering and overriding them are crucial in a
safety-critical application like autonomous racing. Finally, a rule-based overtaking logic allows to resolve
collisions between predicted trajectories. The algorithm is real-time capable on a single CPU core and its
applicability in the overall software stack of the team is proven. The whole software module is available open
source including the training and test data, a ROS2-launch conﬁguration and a build ﬁle to create a Docker
image to run the module containerized.

To demonstrate the performance of the method, we compared its accuracy to that of an unrestricted LSTM-
based encoder-decoder architecture. The results underline that the highly restricted prediction set of MixNet
does not cause large performance degradation. Contrarily, the lateral errors were almost identical in both
cases and since MixNet is capable of incorporating velocity information from the tracking module, it even

outperformed the benchmark model in the overall accuracy. The model also shows great robustness to noised
inputs. Finally, we investigated how consequently the network produces the superpositioning weights.

Contributions

Phillip Karle as the ﬁrst author initiated the idea of this paper and contributed essentially to its concep-
tion, implementation and content. Ferenc T¨or¨ok developed the concept of MixNet, contributed the data
generation, training and evaluation procedure and contributed to the writing of the paper. Maximilian
Geisslinger contributed to the conception and implementation of this research and revision of the research
article. Markus Lienkamp made an essential contribution to the conception of the research project. He
revised the paper critically for important intellectual content. He gave ﬁnal approval of the version to be
published and agrees to all aspects of the work. As a guarantor, he accepts the responsibility for the overall
integrity of the paper.

References

Ammoun, S. and Nashashibi, F. (2009). Real time trajectory prediction for collision risk estimation between
In 2009 IEEE 5th International Conference on Intelligent Computer Communication and

vehicles.
Processing, pages 417–422. IEEE.

Barrios, C. and Motai, Y. (2011).

Improving estimation of vehicle’s trajectory using the latest global
positioning system with kalman ﬁltering. IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement,
60(12):3747–3755.

Betz, J., Betz, T., Fent, F., Geisslinger, M., Heilmeier, A., Hermansdorfer, L., Herrmann, T., Huch, S.,
Karle, P., Lienkamp, M., Lohmann, B., Nobis, F., ¨Ogretmen, L., Rowold, M., Sauerbeck, F., Stahl, T.,
Trauth, R., Werner, F., and Wischnewski, A. (2022a). Tum autonomous motorsport: An autonomous
racing software for the indy autonomous challenge.

Betz, J., Zheng, H., Liniger, A., Rosolia, U., Karle, P., Behl, M., Krovi, V., and Mangharam, R. (2022b).
IEEE Open Journal of

Autonomous vehicles on the edge: A survey on autonomous vehicle racing.
Intelligent Transportation Systems, 3:458–488.

Bicego, M., Murino, V., and Figueiredo, M. A. (2004). Similarity-based classiﬁcation of sequences using

hidden markov models. Pattern Recognition, 37(12):2281–2291.

Buehler, M., Iagnemma, K., and Singh, S. (2007). The 2005 DARPA Grand Challenge: The Great Robot

Race. Springer Publishing Company, Incorporated, 1st edition.

Caesar, H., Bankiti, V., Lang, A. H., Vora, S., Liong, V. E., Xu, Q., Krishnan, A., Pan, Y., Baldan, G.,
and Beijbom, O. (2020). nuscenes: A multimodal dataset for autonomous driving. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).

Chang, M.-F., Lambert, J., Sangkloy, P., Singh, J., Bak, S., Hartnett, A., Wang, D., Carr, P., Lucey,
S., Ramanan, D., and Hays, J. (2019). Argoverse: 3d tracking and forecasting with rich maps.
In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).

Deo, N., Rangesh, A., and Trivedi, M. M. (2018). How would surround vehicles move? a uniﬁed framework
for maneuver classiﬁcation and motion prediction. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles, 3(2):129–
140.

Deo, N. and Trivedi, M. M. (2018). Convolutional social pooling for vehicle trajectory prediction. IEEE Com-
puter Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops, 2018-June:1549–
1557.

Deo, N. and Trivedi, M. M. (2020). Trajectory forecasts in unknown environments conditioned on grid-based

plans. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.00735.

Fernando, T., Denman, S., Sridharan, S., and Fookes, C. (2020). Deep inverse reinforcement learning for
behavior prediction in autonomous driving: Accurate forecasts of vehicle motion. IEEE Signal Processing
Magazine, 38(1):87–96.

Gao, J., Sun, C., Zhao, H., Shen, Y., Anguelov, D., Li, C., and Schmid, C. (2020). Vectornet: Encoding hd
maps and agent dynamics from vectorized representation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).

Geisslinger, M., Karle, P., Betz, J., and Lienkamp, M. (2021). Watch-and-learn-net: Self-supervised online
In 2021 IEEE International Conference on

learning for probabilistic vehicle trajectory prediction.
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC), pages 869–875.

Harmening, N., Biloˇs, M., and G¨unnemann, S. (2020). Deep representation learning and clustering of traﬃc

scenarios. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.07740.

Heilmeier, A., Wischnewski, A., Hermansdorfer, L., Betz, J., Lienkamp, M., and Lohmann, B. (2019). Mini-
mum curvature trajectory planning and control for an autonomous race car. Vehicle System Dynamics.

Houenou, A., Bonnifait, P., Cherfaoui, V., and Yao, W. (2013). Vehicle trajectory prediction based on
motion model and maneuver recognition. In 2013 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems, pages 4363–4369. IEEE.

Kalman, R. E. (1960). A new approach to linear ﬁltering and prediction problems.

Karle, P., Geisslinger, M., Betz, J., and Lienkamp, M. (2022). Scenario understanding and motion pre-
diction for autonomous vehicles – review and comparison. In press, IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Transportation Systems.

Khosroshahi, A., Ohn-Bar, E., and Trivedi, M. M. (2016). Surround vehicles trajectory analysis with
recurrent neural networks. In 2016 IEEE 19th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation
Systems (ITSC), pages 2267–2272. IEEE.

Koschi, M. and Althoﬀ, M. (2017). SPOT: A tool for set-based prediction of traﬃc participants. IEEE

Intelligent Vehicles Symposium, Proceedings, pages 1686–1693.

Kr¨uger, M., Novo, A. S., Nattermann, T., and Bertram, T. (2019). Probabilistic lane change prediction
using gaussian process neural networks. In 2019 IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems Conference
(ITSC), pages 3651–3656. IEEE.

Kueﬂer, A., Morton, J., Wheeler, T., and Kochenderfer, M. (2017). Imitating driver behavior with generative
adversarial networks. In 2017 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV), pages 204–211. IEEE.

Li, J., Ma, H., and Tomizuka, M. (2019a). Conditional generative neural system for probabilistic trajectory
prediction. In 2019 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS),
pages 6150–6156. IEEE.

Li, J., Zhan, W., Hu, Y., and Tomizuka, M. (2019b). Generic tracking and probabilistic prediction framework
and its application in autonomous driving. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems,
21(9):3634–3649.

Mandalia, H. M. and Salvucci, M. D. D. (2005). Using support vector machines for lane-change detection.
In Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, volume 49, pages 1965–
1969. SAGE Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA.

Mayank Bansal, Alex Krizhevsky, and Abhijit S. Ogale (2019). Chauﬀeurnet: Learning to drive by imitating
the best and synthesizing the worst. In Antonio Bicchi, Hadas Kress-Gazit, and Seth Hutchinson, editors,
Robotics: Science and Systems XV.

Mercat, J., Gilles, T., Zoghby, N., Sandou, G., Beauvois, D., and Gil, G. (2020). Multi-head attention
for joint multi-modal vehicle motion forecasting. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation.

Morris, B. T. and Trivedi, M. M. (2011). Trajectory learning for activity understanding: Unsupervised,
multilevel, and long-term adaptive approach. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, 33(11):2287–2301.

Network, E. S. (2019). Indy autonomous challenge rules v5nov2019.

Nogueira, F. (2014). Bayesian Optimization: Open source constrained global optimization tool for Python.

Pek, C., Manzinger, S., Koschi, M., and Althoﬀ, M. (2020). Using online veriﬁcation to prevent autonomous

vehicles from causing accidents. Nature Machine Intelligence, 2(9):518–528.

Ridel, D., Deo, N., Wolf, D., and Trivedi, M. (2020). Scene compliant trajectory forecast with agent-centric

spatio-temporal grids. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 5(2):2816–2823.

Rudenko, A., Palmieri, L., and Arras, K. O. (2018). Joint long-term prediction of human motion using a
planning-based social force approach. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automa-
tion (ICRA), pages 4571–4577. IEEE.

Sadeghian, A., Legros, F., Voisin, M., Vesel, R., Alahi, A., and Savarese, S. (2018). Car-net: Clairvoyant
attentive recurrent network. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV),
pages 151–167.

Salzmann, T., Ivanovic, B., Chakravarty, P., and Pavone, M. (2020). Trajectron++: Dynamically-feasible
trajectory forecasting with heterogeneous data. In Vedaldi, A., Bischof, H., Brox, T., and Frahm, J.-M.,
editors, Computer Vision – ECCV 2020, pages 683–700, Cham. Springer International Publishing.

Schubert, R., Richter, E., and Wanielik, G. (2008). Comparison and evaluation of advanced motion models

for vehicle tracking. In 2008 11th International Conference on Information Fusion, pages 1–6. IEEE.

Smirnov, N., Liu, Y., Validi, A., Morales-Alvarez, W., and Olaverri-Monreal, C. (2021). A game theory-
based approach for modeling autonomous vehicle behavior in congested, urban lane-changing scenarios.
Sensors, 21(4).

Stahl, T., Eicher, M., Betz, J., and Diermeyer, F. (2020). Online veriﬁcation concept for autonomous vehicles
– illustrative study for a trajectory planning module. In 2020 IEEE 23rd International Conference on
Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC), pages 1–7.

Sun, L., Zhan, W., and Tomizuka, M. (2018). Probabilistic prediction of interactive driving behavior via
hierarchical inverse reinforcement learning. In 2018 21st International Conference on Intelligent Trans-
portation Systems (ITSC), pages 2111–2117. IEEE.

Thrun, S., Burgard, W., and Fox, D. (2006). Probabilistic Robotics. Cambridge University Press.

Xie, G., Gao, H., Qian, L., Huang, B., Li, K., and Wang, J. (2017). Vehicle trajectory prediction by inte-
grating physics-and maneuver-based approaches using interactive multiple models. IEEE Transactions
on Industrial Electronics, 65(7):5999–6008.

Xingjian, S., Chen, Z., Wang, H., Yeung, D.-Y., Wong, W.-K., and Woo, W.-c. (2015). Convolutional lstm
network: A machine learning approach for precipitation nowcasting. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, pages 802–810.

Yuan, W., Li, Z., and Wang, C. (2018). Lane-change prediction method for adaptive cruise control system

with hidden markov model. Advances in Mechanical Engineering, 10(9):1687814018802932.

Zhao, Z., Fang, H., Jin, Z., and Qiu, Q. (2020). Gisnet: Graph-based information sharing network for vehicle
trajectory prediction. In 2020 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pages 1–7.

