2
2
0
2

l
u
J

7
2

]
h
p
-
d
e
m

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
7
4
7
1
0
.
8
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Automated modeling of brain bioelectric activity
within the 3D Slicer environment

Saima Safdar1, Benjamin Zwick1, George Bourantas1, Grand Joldes1, Damon
Hyde2,3, Simon Warﬁeld2,3, Adam Wittek1, and Karol Miller1,2

1 Intelligent Systems for Medicine Laboratory, The University of Western Australia, 35
Stirling Highway, Perth, WA, Australia
2 Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
3 Computational Radiology Laboratory, Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA

Abstract. Electrocorticography (ECoG) or intracranial electroencephalog-
raphy (iEEG) monitors electric potential directly on the surface of the
brain and can be used to inform treatment planning for epilepsy surgery
when paired with numerical modeling. For solving the inverse problem
in epilepsy seizure onset localization, accurate solution of the iEEG for-
ward problem is critical which requires accurate representation of the
patient’s brain geometry and tissue electrical conductivity. In this study,
we present an automatic framework for constructing the brain volume
conductor model for solving the iEEG forward problem and visualizing
the brain bioelectric ﬁeld on a deformed patient-speciﬁc brain model
within the 3D Slicer environment. We solve the iEEG forward problem
on the predicted postoperative geometry using the ﬁnite element method
(FEM) which accounts for patient-speciﬁc inhomogeneity and anisotropy
of tissue conductivity. We use an epilepsy case study to illustrate the
workﬂow of our framework developed and integrated within 3D Slicer.

Keywords: epilepsy · framework · modeling · biomechanics · ﬁnite ele-
ment method · patient-speciﬁc.

1

Introduction

Techniques for building patient-speciﬁc models of brain bioelectric activity and
solving such models accurately and eﬃciently are important enablers for neuro-
science and neurology. The application of such modeling and simulation techniques
to the identiﬁcation of epileptic seizure onset zones (SOZ) that consider the brain
at length scales accessible by medical imaging and electrodes is of particular
interest.

Epilepsy is a chronic brain disorder that causes unpredictable and recurrent
electrical activity in the brain (seizures). It aﬀects 65 million people worldwide,
making it one of the most common neurological diseases globally [1]. It is estimated
that about 70% of the people living with epilepsy can be cured if diagnosed and
treated properly [2]. One such treatment option is surgical resection of the area
of the brain where seizures occur. During epilepsy surgery planning using iEEG,

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

S. Safdar et al.

placement of electrode grids and strips, and the body’s inﬂammatory response to
craniotomy, displace and deform the brain relative to its undeformed conﬁguration
observed in the preoperative MRI. This brain shift must be accurately modeled
after insertion of electrode grids to enable precise localization of the SOZ with
respect to preoperative MRI and postoperative CT. The geometry of the patient’s
brain and the electrical conductivity distribution within the patient’s head must
be accurately represented for appropriate SOZ localization [3].

The methodology used to compute the brain shift has been extensively
validated in our previous studies [4–10]. For brain bioelectric activity modeling,
continuum models based on partial diﬀerential equations are the most dominant
models. The governing equations of the iEEG forward problem can be solved
numerically using ﬁnite element (FEM) [11–14], ﬁnite volume (FVM) [15], ﬁnite
diﬀerence (FDM) [16–19] or boundary element methods (BEM) [20–22]. In our
previous study [23], we used the FEM with a mesh coinciding with the voxel
structure of the image to obtain a forward solution to the problem on a deformed
patient-speciﬁc head model.

In this study, we integrate the various components of our framework in the form
of independent modules within 3D Slicer for automatically generating the patient-
speciﬁc head model for solving the iEEG forward problem. We demonstrate the
application of our framework by solving the iEEG forward problem for an epilepsy
case study using patient data obtained from Boston Children’s Hospital. We solve
the iEEG forward problem on the deformed (predicted postoperative) image
obtained after using the framework of biomechanical brain modeling [24–26]
and compute the brain shift with methods extensively validated in our previous
research [4–10].

The paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we describe the framework and
workﬂow, and the methods used in each stage of the framework, for automatically
constructing the patient-speciﬁc head volume conductor model for solving iEEG
forward problem. In section 3, we demonstrate the application of our framework
to the solution of the iEEG forward problem. Section 4 contains discussion and
conclusion.

2 Methods

The framework architecture follows a modular approach, as presented in Fig. 1.
Our automatic system for generating a patient-speciﬁc head model and for solving
the iEEG forward problem consists of the following features: (1) image preprocess-
ing; (2) constructing a patient-speciﬁc head model based on deformed predicted
postoperative MRI [23]; (3) generating electrode sheet model after extracting
electrode locations from postoperative CT with electrodes implanted; (4) as-
signing patient-speciﬁc electrical conductivities to brain tissues; (5) generating
a patient-speciﬁc voxel-based hexahedral mesh; (6) deﬁning current dipole; (7)
patient-speciﬁc model solution for iEEG forward problem; and (8) visualization
of electric potential within patient-speciﬁc head model.

Automated modeling of brain bioelectric activity within 3D Slicer

3

Fig. 1. System workﬂow diagram of the automatic framework along with relevant 3D
Slicer modules and supporting algorithms and techniques for patient-speciﬁc bioelectric
modeling. Yellow blocks represent our developed modules and gray blocks represent the
3D Slicer modules.

4

S. Safdar et al.

The framework features are implemented as a combination of multiple 3D
Slicer command-line interface (CLI) modules and scripted modules, bundled as
one downloadable extension (https://github.com/SlicerCBM/SlicerCBM). Each
module is independent, addressing only a speciﬁc requirement (see Fig. 1). This
modularization makes development and maintenance much easier compared to
working with a monolithic code base. Section 2.1 to section 2.3 describe the
workﬂow of our system for generating a patient-speciﬁc head model based on the
predicted deformed postoperative MRI by our biomechanics system [4–10, 24–26]
for an epilepsy case studied in our previous research, and then solving a forward
problem on the generated head model using our developed 3D Slicer extensions.

2.1 Image preprocessing

In this study, extracting the brain volume and removing the skull is performed
using FreeSurfer software (http://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/). It is an open
source software suite for processing and analyzing human brain medical resonance
images (MRIs) [27]. We used the Watershed algorithm in FreeSurfer to extract
the brain portion from T1-weighted MRI [28]. The Watershed algorithm uses
preﬂooding height factor to adjust the boundaries of the brain to be included
in the extracted brain volume (set of brain MRI slices without skull). After
extracting the brain volume, we applied a threshold ﬁlter (Otsu’s method) [29]
to the brain volume which selects the brain parenchyma and produces a brain
mask. The resulting brain mask is used to reconstruct the brain geometry further
in the pipeline.

2.2 Patient-speciﬁc head model construction for solving iEEG

forward problem

Fig. 2. Results of DTI based image segmentation for a deformed DTI image. Grey
represents grey matter, dark blue represents CSF and remaining represents white matter.
The segmentation of the tissues (white matter, grey matter and CSF) is overlaid with
the DTI image.

Automated modeling of brain bioelectric activity within 3D Slicer

5

Segmenting brain tissues using diﬀusion tensor imaging: A fuzzy c-
means clustering algorithm is used to classify brain tissues using diﬀusion tensor
imaging (DTI) [23]. In the ﬁrst step, mean diﬀusivity is used to separate the
cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) from the rest of the brain. In the second step, fractional
anisotropy is used to separate the white matter (WM) from the gray matter
(GM). The results of DTI based image segmentation are shown for a deformed
DTI in Fig 2.

Fig. 3. Scalp (light brown), skull (yellow) and brain (green) label maps within 3D Slicer

Constructing patient-speciﬁc skull and scalp segments: Segmenting the
skull from CT is diﬃcult due to artifacts caused by the implanted electrodes
and requires time consuming manual segmentation, which is not compatible
with a clinical workﬂow. Therefore, instead of realistic representation of the
skull geometry, we simpliﬁed the construction of the skull geometry by oﬀsetting
the extracted brain volume by 4 voxels. In a similar manner, we constructed
a simpliﬁed model of the scalp by oﬀsetting the skull model by 4 voxels. For
constructing the simpliﬁed skull and scalp models, we developed a module “Scalp
Skull Generator”, in 3D Slicer for automatically generating skull and scalp models.
The module requires extracted brain volume, and two diﬀerent growing margin
numbers (in mm) as an input and it outputs brain, skull and scalp masks (mask
is a separate label set of slices comprising the particular tissue type). The margin
number deﬁnes the thickness of the skull and the scalp. We used the following
set of procedures to create the scalp, skull and brain masks: (1) threshold the
extracted brain volume; (2) copy the thresholded brain volume to create a new
brain volume segment; (3) grow the new brain volume with a speciﬁed margin
size (thickness in mm) to obtain the skull segment; (4) subtract brain volume
from skull segment to create skull mask; (5) grow the skull mask with a speciﬁed
margin size (mm) to create a new segment scalp; and (6) subtract the skull and
brain from the scalp segment to get the scalp. We applied logical operators and

6

S. Safdar et al.

margin grow methods of segment editor [29] to construct the scalp, skull and the
brain masks (see Fig. 3).

Fig. 4. Tissue label maps based on deformed by insertion of electrodes postoperative
image data (predicted postoperative MRI) within 3D Slicer (axial, sagittal, coronal and
3D view). Tissue classes are colored as follows: scalp (pink); skull (yellow); GM (gray);
WM (white); and CSF (blue). The location of the electrode grid array can be identiﬁed
by the line of black voxels in the vicinity of the right temporal and parietal lobes.

Combining patient-speciﬁc brain tissue segments: We developed the “Fu-
sion” module within 3D Slicer to combine brain tissue segments (i.e., white
matter, gray matter and CSF) with skull, scalp and electrode sheet segments.
This module can combine a variety of tissue segments to produce the following
models: (1) undeformed model based on preoperative MRI image (with or without
electrode sheet model); and (2) deformed model based on predicted postoperative
MRI (obtained by warping the preoperative MRI), with or without electrode
sheet model. We used logical operators (union) procedure of 3D Slicer segment
editor module to combine all the segments. We used the brain mask generated
in section 2.1 to ﬁll any gaps in the CSF mask. Fig. 4 shows tissue label maps
based on deformed postoperative image data by insertion of electrodes within
3D Slicer.

Generating an electrode sheet model: ECoG strip and grid electrodes
are typically composed of an array of platinum electrodes embedded into a
sheet of a silastic material. Our automated procedure for reconstructing the
electrode sheet geometry from the postoperative CT image is as follows: (1)
extract electrode locations from postoperative CT image; and (2) create the
electrode sheet model. In step 1, we extract the electrode coordinates from the

Automated modeling of brain bioelectric activity within 3D Slicer

7

Fig. 5. 3D electrode sheet model overlaid with postoperative CT in axial, sagittal,
coronal and 3D window within 3D Slicer

segmented electrode volume (image set containing electrode segmentations) using
our procedure implemented as a 3D Slicer module “Electrodes To Markups”.
The postoperative (post-implantation) electrode positions were extracted (via
segmentation) from the rigidly registered CT image to the preoperative MRI.
The steps involved in extracting electrode locations using our procedure are
as follows: (1) create a binary label volume from segmented electrode volume
using auto thresholding; (2) split the binary label volume to individual segments
corresponding to each electrode; and (3) add a point at the centroid of each
electrode segment. The conversion from segmented electrode volume to binary
label volume (step (1)) is performed using PolySeg [30], a software library that
provides automatic conversions between diﬀerent geometry representations (e.g.,
label map, surface) [30]. Splitting the binary label volume (step (2)) is performed
using “split island into segments” and then “segment statistics” of segment
editor eﬀect module (step (3)) is used to get the centroids (centre of mass of the
segment) [30]. In step 2, we used electrode locations to create an electrode sheet
model by means of PolyData algorithm [31], which creates a triangulated surface.
We then used delaunay method to construct an electrode sheet model based on
triangulated surface [32].

Assigning patient-speciﬁc electrical conductivities: We assigned isotropic
conductivities to the scalp, skull, CSF, electrode grid array substrate and gray
matter regions [23,33,34]. We assigned anisotropic conductivity to the white mat-
ter region. We estimated the anisotropic conductivity values using the fractional
methods directly from the diﬀusion tensors [23, 35].

8

S. Safdar et al.

Fig. 6. 3D patient-speciﬁc regular hexahedral mesh in 3D window within 3D Slicer.

Generating patient-speciﬁc voxel-based hexahedral mesh: We used the
MVox mesh generator (https://github.com/benzwick/mvox) to generate a regular
hexahedral ﬁnite element mesh (Fig. 6) corresponding to the voxels of the 3D
conductivity tensor image. Each nonzero voxel in the input image is converted
to a hexahedral element centered at the voxel’s centroid. MVox is implemented
using the open source MFEM library [36]. It supports a variety of input and
output ﬁle formats. We integrated MVox as the “MVox Mesh Generator” module
within 3D Slicer.

Deﬁning a dipole: We used the “Markups” module of 3D Slicer [29] to generate
a vtkMRMLMarkupsLineNode to deﬁne the dipole in the gray matter region of
the brain tissue. It is represented as two 3D control points in the 3D plane (see
Fig. 7)

2.3 Model solution for EEG forward problem

We used the ﬁnite element method with a regular hexahedral mesh that corre-
sponds to the voxel structure of the image [14,23,37,38]. We assigned conductivity
tensors directly from image voxels to integration points in the elements of the
hexahedral mesh. We refer to this approach of assigning the values from image
voxels to elements as the “image as a model” approach, as the ﬁnite element
mesh used to solve problem directly corresponds to image data. All elements
in a regular hexahedral mesh are cubes with perfect element quality. We used
a ﬁnite element mesh with 1,618,745 nodal points and 1,565,095 linear hexa-
hedral elements for solving the EEG forward problem. We implemented the
solution to the EEG forward problem using the open-source MFEM library [39]
(https://mfem.org) and integrated into 3D Slicer as a separate module. We used
continuous Galerkin formulation with linear hexahedral elements for spatial
discretization of the potential and for computing the electric ﬁeld [23]. We used
the full subtraction approach to model the current dipole source [11]. We solved
the discretized equations using the conjugate gradient (CG) method with an

Automated modeling of brain bioelectric activity within 3D Slicer

9

algebraic multigrid (AMG) preconditioner from the HYPRE library of linear
solvers (http://www.llnl.gov/casc/hypre).

Fig. 7. Mean conductivity of the deformed model based on image data deformed by
implantation of electrodes shown in axial, sagittal and coronal view overlaid with
deformed MRI and 3D brain model in 3D window within 3D Slicer. The current dipole
moment vector is denoted by the pink line with two ﬁducial points. The electrode sheet
is denoted by the purple color.

3 Results

We demonstrate the application of our framework by solving an iEEG forward
problem. We solved the iEEG forward problem with a current dipole source using
the deformed image data with the actual electrode locations. We put a dipole in
the gray matter of the brain with a dipole moment of 100 µAmm to replicate a
current dipole set up by cortical neurons. Fig. 7 shows mean conductivity of the
deformed model based on image data deformed by implantation of electrodes.
Fig. 8 shows the predicted distribution of electric potential within the brain
computed using the model based on the deformed image data with the actual
electrode positions. We used deformed image data with actual electrode positions
to avoid the error introduced by using incorrect tissue geometry. As discussed in
our previous study [23], the correct geometry can reduce the eﬀect of inaccuracy
of source localization.

4 Discussion

In this paper, we presented an automated framework for constructing a patient-
speciﬁc head volume conductor model and computing the brain bioelectric

10

S. Safdar et al.

Fig. 8. Electric potential in the brain generated by a current dipole predicted by the
deformed model based on image data deformed by implantation of electrodes. The
current dipole moment vector is denoted by the pink line with two ﬁducial points. The
electrode sheet model is denoted by the purple color.

activity within the 3D Slicer environment. To demonstrate the application of our
framework, we used the predicted postoperative MRI with implanted intracranial
electrodes obtained from our previous study [23, 24] of a real, patient-speciﬁc
case from Boston Children’s Hospital.

The generation of the patient-speciﬁc computational model for the iEEG for-
ward problem which include image preprocessing, segmentation of electrodes and
electrode sheet generation, scalp and skull generation, brain tissue classiﬁcation
and fusion of brain tissues, scalp, skull and electrode sheet, conductivity tensor
estimation and generation of the ﬁnite element mesh, can take approximately 10
min per patient. The time to generate a patient-speciﬁc computational model for
the iEEG forward problem using our workﬂow system is acceptable in the research
environment and could be considered to be suﬃcient for clinical applications. We
have automated all of the modeling stages in preparation for use in a clinical
setting. We demonstrated the applicability of the developed framework by solving
the iEEG forward problem. We showed the electric potential of the model of the
brain with current dipole using the deformed (predicted postoperative) image
data.

We have developed the modules to automate the modeling tasks to reduce
the time required to construct a patient-speciﬁc model for solving the iEEG
forward problem and support the medical practitioners by providing an easy to
use graphical user interface (GUI). This can also make the solution of the iEEG
inverse problem feasible as we intend to combine the framework described in
this paper with an appropriate method for solving the iEEG inverse problem
to enable accurate source localization for epilepsy patients who have undergone
invasive electrophysiological monitoring. We use a modular approach to develop
our system which makes it easy to integrate existing frameworks or components.

Automated modeling of brain bioelectric activity within 3D Slicer

11

We plan to take advantage of this in the future by integrating other freely available
open-source frameworks (e.g. FreeSurfer, DUNEuro etc) within our system.

Acknowledgments

A. Wittek and K. Miller acknowledge the support by the Australian Government
through National Health and Medical Research Project Grant no. APP1162030.

References

1. Thurman, D.J., Beghi, E., Begley, C.E., Berg, A.T., Buchhalter, J.R., Ding, D., Hes-
dorﬀer, D.C., Hauser, W.A., Kazis, L., Kobau, R., et al.: Standards for epidemiologic
studies and surveillance of epilepsy. Epilepsia 52, 2–26 (2011)

2. Engel, J.: A Greater Role for Surgical Treatment of Epilepsy: Why and When?

Epilepsy Currents 3(2), 37–40 (2003)

3. Casta˜no-Candamil, S., H¨ohne, J., Mart´ınez-Vargas, J.D., An, X.W., Castellanos-
Dom´ınguez, G., Haufe, S.: Solving the EEG inverse problem based on
space–time–frequency structured sparsity constraints. NeuroImage 118, 598–612
(Sep 2015)

4. Garlapati, R.R., Roy, A., Joldes, G.R., Wittek, A., Mostayed, A., Doyle, B., Warﬁeld,
S.K., Kikinis, R., Knuckey, N., Bunt, S., et al.: More accurate neuronavigation
data provided by biomechanical modeling instead of rigid registration. Journal of
neurosurgery 120(6), 1477–1483 (2014)

5. Miller, K., Horton, A., Joldes, G.R., Wittek, A.: Beyond ﬁnite elements: A com-
prehensive, patient-speciﬁc neurosurgical simulation utilizing a meshless method.
Journal of Biomechanics 45(15), 2698–2701 (2012)

6. Miller, K., Joldes, G.R., Bourantas, G., Warﬁeld, S.K., Hyde, D.E., Kikinis, R.,
Wittek, A.: Biomechanical modeling and computer simulation of the brain during
neurosurgery. International journal for numerical methods in biomedical engineering
35(10), e3250 (2019)

7. Mostayed, A., Garlapati, R.R., Joldes, G.R., Wittek, A., Roy, A., Kikinis, R.,
Warﬁeld, S.K., Miller, K.: Biomechanical model as a registration tool for image-
guided neurosurgery: evaluation against bspline registration. Annals of biomedical
engineering 41(11), 2409–2425 (2013)

8. Wittek, A., Miller, K., Kikinis, R., Warﬁeld, S.K.: Patient-speciﬁc model of brain
deformation: Application to medical image registration. Journal of biomechanics
40(4), 919–929 (2007)

9. Wittek, A., Hawkins, T., Miller, K.: On the unimportance of constitutive models in
computing brain deformation for image-guided surgery. Biomechanics and Modeling
in Mechanobiology 8, 77–84 (2009)

10. Wittek, A., Joldes, G., Couton, M., Warﬁeld, S.K., Miller, K.: Patient-speciﬁc
non-linear ﬁnite element modelling for predicting soft organ deformation in real-
time; application to non-rigid neuroimage registration. Progress in Biophysics and
Molecular Biology 103, 292 – 303 (2010)

11. Drechsler, F., Wolters, C.H., Dierkes, T., Si, H., Grasedyck, L.: A full subtraction
approach for ﬁnite element method based source analysis using constrained Delaunay
tetrahedralisation. NeuroImage 46(4), 1055–1065 (Jul 2009)

12

S. Safdar et al.

12. Marin, G., Guerin, C., Baillet, S., Garnero, L., Meunier, G.: Inﬂuence of skull
anisotropy for the forward and inverse problem in EEG: Simulation studies using
FEM on realistic head models. Human Brain Mapping 6(4), 250–269 (1998)
13. Pursiainen, S., Sorrentino, A., Campi, C., Piana, M.: Forward simulation and
inverse dipole localization with the lowest order Raviart—Thomas elements for
electroencephalography. Inverse Problems 27(4), 045003 (Mar 2011)

14. Schimpf, P.H., Ramon, C., Haueisen, J.: Dipole models for the EEG and MEG.

IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 49(5), 409–418 (May 2002)

15. Cook, M.J.D., Koles, Z.J.: A High-Resolution Anisotropic Finite-Volume Head
Model for EEG Source Analysis. In: 2006 International Conference of the IEEE
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society. pp. 4536–4539 (Aug 2006)

16. Bourantas, G.C., Zwick, B.F., Warﬁeld, S.K., Hyde, D.E., Wittek, A., Miller, K.:
A Flux-Conservative Finite Diﬀerence Scheme for Anisotropic Bioelectric Problems.
In: Miller, K., Wittek, A., Joldes, G.R., Nash, M.P., Nielsen, P.M.F. (eds.) Compu-
tational Biomechanics for Medicine, pp. 135–146. Springer International Publishing,
Cham (2020)

17. Hyde, D.E., Duﬀy, F.H., Warﬁeld, S.K.: Anisotropic partial volume CSF modeling

for EEG source localization. NeuroImage 62(3), 2161–2170 (Sep 2012)

18. Saleheen, H., Ng, K.: New ﬁnite diﬀerence formulations for general inhomogeneous
anisotropic bioelectric problems. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering
44(9), 800–809 (Sep 1997)

19. Wendel, K., Narra, N.G., Hannula, M., Kauppinen, P., Malmivuo, J.: The Inﬂuence
of CSF on EEG Sensitivity Distributions of Multilayered Head Models. IEEE
Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 55(4), 1454–1456 (Apr 2008)

20. Acar, Z.A., Makeig, S.: Neuroelectromagnetic Forward Head Modeling Toolbox.

Journal of Neuroscience Methods 190(2), 258–270 (Jul 2010)

21. Meijs, J., Weier, O., Peters, M., Van Oosterom, A.: On the numerical accuracy of
the boundary element method (EEG application). IEEE Transactions on Biomedical
Engineering 36(10), 1038–1049 (Oct 1989)

22. Stenroos, M., Sarvas, J.: Bioelectromagnetic forward problem: Isolated source
approach revis(it)ed. Physics in Medicine and Biology 57(11), 3517–3535 (May
2012)

23. Zwick, B.F., Bourantas, G.C., Safdar, S., Joldes, G.R., Hyde, D.E., Warﬁeld,
S.K., Wittek, A., Miller, K.: Patient-speciﬁc solution of the electrocorticography
forward problem in deforming brain. (submitted to NeuroImage) (2022), http:
//arxiv.org/abs/2109.07164

24. Safdar, S., Zwick, B., Bourantas, G., Joldes, G., Warﬁeld, S.K., Hyde, D.E., Wittek,
A., Miller, K.: Automatic framework for patient-speciﬁc biomechanical computations
of organ deformation: an epilepsy (eeg) case study. In: Computational Biomechanics
for Medicine - Towards translation and better patient outcomes. Springer (2022)

25. Safdar, S., Joldes, G., Zwick, B., Bourantas, G., Kikinis, R., Wittek, A., Miller, K.:
Automatic Framework for Patient-Speciﬁc Biomechanical Computations of Organ
Deformation, pp. 3–16. Springer (2021)

26. Yu, Y., Safdar, S., Bourantas, G., Zwick, B., Joldes, G., Kapur, T., Frisken, S.,
Kiknis, R., Nabavi, A., Golby, A., et al.: Automatic framework for patient-speciﬁc
modelling of tumour resection-induced brain shift. Computers in Biology and
Medicine p. 105271 (2022)

27. Dale, A.M., Fischl, B., Sereno, M.I.: Cortical Surface-Based Analysis: I. Segmenta-

tion and Surface Reconstruction. NeuroImage 9(2), 179–194 (Feb 1999)

Automated modeling of brain bioelectric activity within 3D Slicer

13

28. S´egonne, F., Dale, A.M., Busa, E., Glessner, M., Salat, D., Hahn, H.K., Fischl,
B.: A hybrid approach to the skull stripping problem in mri. NeuroImage 22(3),
1060–1075 (2004)

29. Fedorov, A., Beichel, R., Kalpathy Cramer, J., Finet, J., Fillion Robin, J.C., Pujol,
S., Bauer, C., Jennings, D., Fennessy, F., Sonka, M., Buatti, J., Aylward, S., Miller,
J., Pieper, S., Kikinis, R.: 3D Slicer as an image computing platform for the
Quantitative Imaging Network. Magnetic resonance imaging 30(9), 1323–41 (2012)
30. Pinter, C., Lasso, A., Fichtinger, G.: Polymorph segmentation representation for
medical image computing. Computer methods and programs in biomedicine 171,
19–26 (2019)

31. Sullivan, C., Kaszynski, A.: PyVista: 3D plotting and mesh analysis through a
streamlined interface for the visualization toolkit (VTK). Journal of Open Source
Software 4(37), 1450 (2019)

32. Valette, S., Chassery, J.M., Prost, R.: Generic remeshing of 3d triangular meshes
with metric-dependent discrete voronoi diagrams. IEEE Transactions on Visualiza-
tion and Computer Graphics 14(2), 369–381 (2008)

33. Hallez, H., Vanrumste, B., Grech, R., Muscat, J., De Clercq, W., Vergult, A.,
D’Asseler, Y., Camilleri, K.P., Fabri, S.G., Van Huﬀel, S., Lemahieu, I.: Review on
solving the forward problem in EEG source analysis. Journal of NeuroEngineering
and Rehabilitation 4(1), 46 (Nov 2007)

34. Vorwerk, J., Cho, J.H., Rampp, S., Hamer, H., Kn¨osche, T.R., Wolters, C.H.: A
guideline for head volume conductor modeling in EEG and MEG. NeuroImage 100,
590–607 (Oct 2014)

35. Tuch, D.S., Wedeen, V.J., Dale, A.M., George, J.S., Belliveau, J.W.: Conductivity
tensor mapping of the human brain using diﬀusion tensor MRI. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 98(20), 11697–11701 (Sep 2001)

36. Anderson, R., Andrej, J., Barker, A., Bramwell, J., Camier, J.S., Cerveny, J.,
Dobrev, V., Dudouit, Y., Fisher, A., Kolev, T., et al.: Mfem: A modular ﬁnite
element methods library. Computers & Mathematics with Applications 81, 42–74
(2021)

37. Wolters, C.H., Anwander, A., Berti, G., Hartmann, U.: Geometry-Adapted Hex-
ahedral Meshes Improve Accuracy of Finite-Element-Method-Based EEG Source
Analysis. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 54(8), 1446–1453 (Aug
2007)

38. Rullmann, M., Anwander, A., Dannhauer, M., Warﬁeld, S.K., Duﬀy, F.H., Wolters,
C.H.: EEG source analysis of epileptiform activity using a 1 mm anisotropic
hexahedra ﬁnite element head model. NeuroImage 44(2), 399–410 (Jan 2009)
39. Anderson, R., Andrej, J., Barker, A., Bramwell, J., Camier, J.S., Cerveny, J.,
Dobrev, V., Dudouit, Y., Fisher, A., Kolev, T., Pazner, W., Stowell, M., Tomov,
V., Akkerman, I., Dahm, J., Medina, D., Zampini, S.: MFEM: A modular ﬁnite
element methods library. Computers & Mathematics with Applications (Jul 2020)

