SPIM-FLOW: AN INTEGRATED LIGHT-SHEET AND
MICROFLUIDICS PLATFORM FOR HYDRODYNAMIC STUDIES OF
Hydra ∗

Per Niklas Hedde,1,# Erika L. Gomez,2 Leora Duong,3 Robert E. Steele,4 Siavash Ahrar2,5,#

1Beckman Laser Institute and Medical Clinic, University of California Irvine, CA, USA
2Department of Biomedical Engineering, CSU Long Beach, CA, USA
3 Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of California Irvine, CA, USA
4 Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California Irvine, CA, USA
5 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of California Irvine, CA, USA

# authors contributed equally and to whom correspondence should be addressed

Selective plane illumination microscopy (SPIM), or light sheet, is a powerful three-dimensional
imaging approach. However, access to and interfacing microscopes with microﬂuidics have remained
challenging. Complex interfacing with microﬂuidics has limited the SPIM’s utility in studying the
hydrodynamics of freely moving multicellular organisms. We developed SPIM-Flow, an inexpensive
light sheet platform that enables easy integration with microﬂuidics. We used SPIM-Flow to study
the hydrodynamics of a freely moving Hydra polyp in millimeter-sized chambers (4 mm wide, 1.5
mm height). Our initial experiments across multiple animals, feeding on a chip (Artemia franciscana
nauplius used as food), and baseline behaviors (e.g., tentacle swaying, elongation, and bending)
indicated animals’ health inside the system. SPIM enabled easy imaging of the freely moving animal
and tracer beads (for ﬂuid visualizations) inside the larger chambers. Next, using the chambers, we
investigated Hydra’s response to ﬂow. Results suggest that animals responded to established ﬂow by
bending and swaying their tentacles in the ﬂow direction. Finally, we used a previously described
video analysis software (FlowTrace) to visualize pathlines generated by (e.g., vortex generated by the
tentacle sways) and around Hydra (e.g., due to ﬂow). These results demonstrated the SPIM-Flow’s
utility to study the hydrodynamics of freely moving animals.

2
2
0
2

g
u
A
0
3

]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
0
3
4
4
1
.
8
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗Citation: Hedde PN, et al., SPIM-Flow: An Integrated light-sheet and ﬂuidics platform for Hydrodynamic Studies of

Hydra, DOI:000000/11111.

 
 
 
 
 
 
SPIM-Flow: An integrated light-sheet and microﬂuidics platform for Hydrodynamic Studies of Hydra

1

Introduction

1.1 Need for SPIM

Selective plane illumination microscopy (SPIM), or light sheet microscopy, is a powerful approach for three-dimensional
(3D) imaging of biological samples at high spatio-temporal resolution[1]. Typically, the excitation arm (i.e., light sheet
path) of the microscope is arranged at a 90-degree angle relative to the detection arm (i.e., camera path)[2]. In the
observation plane, the excitation light is restricted to a thin illumination plane via cylindrical optics or other beam
shaping methods. This one dimensional conﬁnement provides true optical sectioning, and limits phototoxicity and
photobleaching of the sample, thus enabling long-term imaging [1]. A wide variety of SPIM platforms have been
demonstrated [3]. Examples include open-source platforms [4, 5], systems that use a single objective [6], approaches
that equip epiﬂuorescence microscopes with light sheet illumination [6], and even systems that use mobile phones for
imaging [7]. SPIM has enabled biological discoveries across sub-cellular imaging [8, 9], developmental studies (across
vertebrates, invertebrates, and plant model systems) [10, 11, 12], and optically cleared tissues (e.g., entire brains of
small animals) [13]. While SPIM provides a powerful approach for long-term 3D imaging, samples are often housed
in static conditions. Thus, interfacing SPIM with ﬂuidics could further enhance the approach by allowing dynamic
manipulation of a sample’s microenvironment [14].

1.2

Integrating SPIM with ﬂuidics

Various strategies have been explored to integrate ﬂuidics with light sheet microscopy[15]. Such integration has
enabled cytometry platforms[16, 17, 18], generation and visualization of droplets [19], and optoﬂuidic-based platforms
for 3D visualizing of cells, C. elegans, and Drosophila embryos [21, 22, 23]. For example, a recent exciting study
by Vanwalleghem et al. demonstrated the strength of integration for studying larval zebraﬁsh brain-wide activity
while using ﬂow as a stimulus [20]. We have also explored using a light sheet conﬁguration (based on an inverted
epiﬂuorescence microscope) which can accommodate chambers with ﬂow [21]. Despite this progress, integrating SPIM
with ﬂuidics has remained difﬁcult. For example, the integrating requires modiﬁcation to the microscope or signiﬁcant
modiﬁcation to the microchambers [15]. To address this gap, we present SPIM-Flow, a simple and inexpensive system
that readily integrates light sheet microscopy with ﬂuidics. We used SPIM-Flow to investigate the hydrodynamic
behavior of a freely moving Hydra polyp in a millimeter-sized chamber (4 mm wide, 1.5 mm height).

1.3 Hydra as a model for biomechanics and hydrodynamics

Hydra is a freshwater cnidarian studied for its remarkable regenerative abilities[22]. Its transparent, tube-shaped body is
divided into three regions: head, body column, and foot. The head includes tentacles and the hypostome – a dome-like
structure containing the mouth opening at its apex. Hydra uses the foot (i.e., basal disc) to attach to surfaces. The shape
and movement of the body are controlled via a hydrostatic skeleton where ﬂuid pressure transmits forces [22, 23]. With
these characteristics, Hydra is an excellent model system for studying biomechanics and hydrodynamics. A recent study,
for example, using imaging and machine learning, showed that the behavioral repertoire of Hydra can be divided into
six fundamental components (i.e., Elongation, Tentacle sway, Body sway, Bending, Contraction, and Somersaulting)
[24]. In other studies, it was shown that Hydra must tear a hole through its epithelial tissue to open its mouth [25, 26].
Most of these experiments are conducted under static conditions. Using ﬂuid chambers would allow one to expand
such studies by modulating the microenvironments’ physical (e.g., ﬂow) or chemical (e.g., transitory drug delivery)
compositions.

In a recent study, Badhiwala et al. developed three microﬂuidic systems to study Hydra [27]. These included a chamber
to constrain the body column and enable electrophysiology, a perfusion chamber for constrained locomotion, and a
quasi-2D plane behavioral chamber (200-600 µm heights). These investigators recently used a double-layer microﬂuidic
system to mechanically stimulate Hydra via pneumatic valves and measure neuronal responses via calcium imaging
[28]. In particular, these platforms enabled neuronal studies that required animal immobilization or small chambers.
However, these restrictions limit the movement of the organism and may negatively impact its health. In our study, by
taking advantage of SPIM-Flow, we sought to investigate Hydra’s response to ﬂow without dramatically restricting
movement. We constructed chambers 4 mm wide and 1.5 mm tall. We used ﬂuidics to modulate the hydrodynamic
environment, for example introducing ﬂow or prey. We used our light sheet system to visualize the hydrodynamics
of animal movement. Our studies suggest that Hydra typically remains in an elongated or swaying state inside the
chambers without ﬂow. Hydra responds to ﬂow initiation via contraction or tentacle swaying. Moreover, Hydra typically
reorients by body bending (head and tentacles) in the ﬂow direction.

2

SPIM-Flow: An integrated light-sheet and microﬂuidics platform for Hydrodynamic Studies of Hydra

2 Methods

2.1 Optical system

The excitation arm included a compact laser diode, an adjustable iris, and a cylindrical lens. To create the light sheet,
similar to our prior efforts [8], we cut the central part of the elliptical beam of a laser diode (wavelength 445 nm or
488 nm) with the iris (Thor labs SM1D12), followed by a cylindrical lens (f=12 mm) that focused the light along one
dimension to form a sheet of light at the observation plane. These components were housed inside a custom-designed
3D-printed enclosure. We used a cannon-like design (i.e., light-cannon) to bring the cylindrical lens close to the
ﬂuidic chip. The 3D-printed enclosure containing the optical components for excitation was then mounted on an XYZ
micromanipulator. A light sheet of 7 µm thickness was created utilizing these components (see Supplemental for
analysis). The excitation arm was mounted on an optical breadboard at a 90-degree angle relative to the detection arm.
The detection arm included a custom-designed 3D-printed chip holder to bring the ﬂuidic chip close to the light-cannon.
Fluorescent signals were collected perpendicular to the excitation with an objective lens (10x, NA 0.25) followed by
an emission ﬁlter (500 nm long pass) and a tube lens (f = 50 mm) for imaging with a CMOS camera (FLIR Blackﬂy
S-U3-200S6C-C: 20 MP). SPIM-Flow’s system-level diagram is provided (Figure 1.A). SPIM-Flow was housed on
a small optical breadboard (300 mm x 300 mm) and inside an opaque enclosure to shield the setup from external
light. Micro-manager software was used to control the camera. Designs for the 3D parts will be available from a
corresponding OSF page.

2.2 Milliﬂuidic system

We used laser cutting to build the molds used in the study instead of conventional lithographic approaches. The size of
Hydra (typically 0.5 -10 mm long) and our goal to investigate their unhindered hydrodynamics informed our choice. To
this aim, channels were designed to be 4 mm wide and 5 cm long. We laser cut the design on acrylic sheets (1/16th
inch, 1.5 mm thickness) via a desktop laser cutter. Plastic parts were permanently attached to a ﬂat base (either a plastic
part or a glass slide). The attachment prevented the unwanted PDMS accumulation under the mold during the silicone
casting. After the mold fabrication, we used conventional protocols to cast silicone parts from the mold (1:10 linker to
the base mass ratio followed by baking the molds on hotplates at 85°C until the PDMS were fully cured). Individual
devices were cut from the mold using craft knives, and inlet/outlet holes were introduced using disposable (1 or 2 mm
diameters) biopsy punches.

Next, each PDMS part was plasma bonded to a microscope glass slide via a Harrick Basic Plasma cleaner. We placed
the edge of the PDMS part on the edge of the glass slide to minimize the distance between the channel and the light
cannon (Figure 1.B and 1.C). Additionally, we took steps to remove any roughness from the outer edges of the devices
to minimize potential imaging artifacts. Some roughness can be introduced to the outer edges of PDMS parts while
cutting them via a craft knife. In a typical epiﬂuorescent illumination, such roughness is of no concern,since the path of
light is through the device top (typically PDMS) and glass bottom. In our system, however, the chamber is illuminated
through a PDMS wall and viewed from the device top. We applied additional uncured PDMS to the device’s outer wall
using a craft knife after plasma bonding and removed any roughness. We left the device (with the side with fresh PDMS
facing up) at room temperature for three hours. This pause allowed the PDMS to spread evenly and partially cure.
Then we backed the device at 95°C to ensure that the PDMS was entirely cured. During the early experiments, we also
attached coverslips to the device roof. However, later experiments demonstrated that the coverslip did not signiﬁcantly
improve imaging.

2.3 Hydra culture

All experiments were carried out using the PT1 transgenic line of Hydra vulgaris [29]. PT1 contains two transgenes.
One of the transgenes expresses green ﬂuorescent protein under the control of the promoter from the gene encoding the
Hym176B neuropeptide. The other transgene expresses the DsRed2 gene under the control of an actin gene promoter.
This line expresses green ﬂuorescent neurons and red ﬂuorescent epithelial cells. PT1 was maintained in Hydra medium
4.0, which was prepared using house deionized water and contained 1 mM calcium chloride, 0.33 mM magnesium
sulfate, 0.5 mM sodium bicarbonate, and 0.03 mM potassium chloride. The hydras were fed once a week with nauplii
of Artemia franciscana from San Francisco Bay (Brine Shrimp Direct, Ogden, UT). Hydra cultures were kept in an
incubator at 18°C on a 12 hour light/12 hour dark cycle.

3

SPIM-Flow: An integrated light-sheet and microﬂuidics platform for Hydrodynamic Studies of Hydra

3 Results

3.1 Loading the Hydra

We developed a simple protocol to minimize potential damage and increase the successful loading of animals. First, a
device was partially (1/2) ﬁlled with media. We used a glass Pasteur pipette to retrieve an animal from a culture tube.
Our biggest challenge was Hydra adhering to the glass transfer pipette since Hydra can rapidly adhere and remain
ﬁrmly attached to surfaces. It is essential to transfer a Hydra quickly. Therefore, we released the animals directly inside
a device inlet or on top of the inlet with excess media from the pipette to a device. Next, we used liquid withdrawal
with a micropipette (1 mL) or a syringe to draw the animal with the additional liquid inside the chamber. We sought
to position each Hydra toward the chamber’s center for ease of imaging. To enable ﬂow visualization, we added red
ﬂuorescent beads (1 µm diameter, Fluoro-Max Polymer microspheres) to the medium. We note that beads are also
visible in GFP emission wavelength.

After loading, the chamber was placed and secured on the 3D-printed chip holder. Hydra medium with beads was
delivered to the chamber using an external syringe pump (KDS Legato, 210P series) via 3 or 10 mL syringes. Typical
of all microﬂuidics experiments, care was taken to ensure there were no air bubbles upstream of the device. However,
small bubbles were not a problem. For example, early in the studies, we accidentally introduced air bubbles into
two chambers. In each case, the animal rapidly responded to the air bubble and the pressure by contracting/bending.
Animals were able to survive these exposures. However, we chose to replace these animals with fresh ones.

At the start of the study, we sought to observe feeding behavior of Hydra in the system to examine health. After loading
a Hydra on a chip, multiple prey animals (Artemia franciscana) were added to the chamber. We ﬁrst used the imaging
without its light sheet capabilities to independently investigate the potential chamber effects. Hydra could successfully
capture and eat multiple (2 to 3) Artemia inside the chamber. Next, we veriﬁed similar feeding behavior using the
SPIM imaging capabilities across independent animals (Supplemental Figure 1, and Supplemental Video 1) - video and
images are from two different animals. After feeding, Hydra ignored the remaining prey in the chamber. The feeding
results (across N=4 different animals) suggested that the ﬂuid chambers and the light sheet did not negatively impact
the organisms’ health. Experiments presented in the study took 2-3 hours; however, we have conﬁrmed that a Hydra
can be kept alive on the same chip for multiple days.

3.2 Static conditions and baseline behaviors

Next, we examined the animals’ health and sought to demonstrate the feasibility of observing various behaviors via
SPIM-Flow without ﬂow. Given the device’s dimension, the animals’ overall movements were unhindered. However,
some animals could stretch across the entire 4 mm width of the chamber. Using the light sheet, we illuminated different
regions of the freely moving animals. Hydra responds to light as a stimulus [30, 31, 32, 33].To minimize the role
of light as a sudden stimulus, we started recording an experiment 5 minutes after the light introduction. A typical
recording session would last between 2-3 hours. SPIM’s capability to limit the light exposure (only to the illuminated
sheet) prevented photobleaching or phototoxicity. However, given the role of light as a stimulus, additional studies are
required, and SPIM-Flow could provide a versatile tool for this aim. We observed that most animals typically adhered
to the surfaces (PDMS wall or the glass slide) closer to the direction of excitation light (wavelength 485 nm or 455
nm). Without ﬂow, we observed behaviors ranging from elongation, and tentacle movement/swaying. (Figures 2 and 3,
Supplemental Figure 2, Supplemental Video 3). Most animals would remain in the chambers elongated or in a tentacle
swaying state. Despite the chambers’ large size, we did not observe somersaulting behaviors. These observations
further supported animals’ overall health and helped demonstrate that various repertoires of animal movements can be
captured via SPIM-Flow.

3.3 Response to ﬂow

Next, we investigated Hydra response to ﬂow. Hydra lives in bodies of freshwater that may experience local ﬂow
patterns due to environmental perturbations or currents in streams and rivers. Therefore, tools to investigate their
hydrodynamic response to ﬂow could provide valuable insights into the organisms’ biomechanical and hydrodynamic
lifestyle. In their study, Badhiwala et al. [27] commented that animals typically bend in the ﬂow direction. We sought
to investigate this observation by utilizing our larger channels (1.5 mm in height, 4 mm wide). Similar to the Badhiwala
et al. study, our results (across four independent animals) suggest that Hydra typically responds to ﬂow by bending and
swaying their tentacles in the ﬂow direction. Reversing the direction of ﬂow resulted in Hydra redirecting accordingly
(Figure 4). For example, in results from Figure 4, the animal responded to the volumetric ﬂow rate of 2 mL/hr. Larger
animals could withstand ﬂow rates as large as 50 mL/hr. Our results also suggest that an animal could immediately
respond to the ﬂow initiation via rapid contraction or tentacles swaying in the direction of the ﬂow (Supplemental

4

SPIM-Flow: An integrated light-sheet and microﬂuidics platform for Hydrodynamic Studies of Hydra

Figure 3). However, additional experiments are required to better understand the immediate response to ﬂow initiation.
Utilizing SPIM-Flow, we brieﬂy explored a proof of concept experiment, to investigate Hydra’s response to pulsatile
ﬂow. Our preliminary results suggest that pulsatile ﬂow resulted in an animal stretching towards the direction of the
ﬂow.

Finally, we used a previously described ﬂow visualization algorithm, FlowTrace, to help better visualize the hydrody-
namic patterns observed via SPIM-Flow. FlowTrace is a powerful yet simple algorithm that enables the extraction of
ﬂow features from video recordings [34, 35]. Unlike typical pipelines for particle image velocimetry, FlowTrace is not
computationally taxing. FlowTrace has been used to extract pathlines to visualize the time-varying ﬂow ﬁelds generated
by starﬁsh larvae and other organisms. We used FlowTrace analysis of the SPIM-Flow videos to visualize ﬂow ﬁelds
(e.g., vortex generated by the tentacle sways) and pathlines generated by and around Hydra. For this, we used the
algorithm as a FIJI plugin [34]. Figure 5 demonstrates the original recording (A), and the corresponding FlowTrace
visualizations (B). Pathline visualizations corresponding to Figure 4 and FlowTrace videos are provided as part of the
supplemental material.

4 Discussion and Conclusion

Despite tremendous progress, access to SPIM imaging and interfacing the conventional systems with modern ﬂuidics
have remained challenging. We sought to address this gap by establishing SPIM-Flow. Our platform is an inexpensive
light sheet microscope readily designed for integration with microﬂuidics. To validate the usefulness of SPIM-Flow, we
used the platform to study the hydrodynamics of freely moving Hydra in static and dynamic conditions. SPIM-Flow
could enable various applications; for example, we explored its use as an image-based ﬂow cytometer. However, as
demonstrated, it could serve as a powerful tool to visualize and manipulate whole organisms and their microenvironment.
Light sheet imaging speciﬁcally enabled easy visualization of tracer beads to extract hydrodynamic features. As a
comparison, we also imaged the animals inside the chambers via a standard ﬂuorescent microscope (Nikon Eclipse
Ti-E microscope 10X objective - Supplemental Figure 5). Simultaneously visualizing the beads and the animal (due
to the high signal from the animal and the background volume) were difﬁcult with a standard microscope. Indeed
SPIM-Flow is not a replacement for a standard ﬂuorescent microscope. Instead, it is a complementary and inexpensive
tool which enables hydrodynamic studies of organisms, such as Hydra. Our initial experiments (feeding and observing
various behaviors) supported that the platform did not impact animals’ health. Next, we used microﬂuidics to investigate
Hydra’s response to continuous ﬂow. Our results across multiple animals (N=4) suggest Hydra responds to ﬂow by
bending in the ﬂow direction. Reversing the direction of ﬂow led to animals’ reorientation. Utilizing the light sheet
imaging, we visualized pathlines (via ﬂuorescent beads) throughout the study. Moreover, using the FlowTrace algorithm,
we produced visualizations highlighting the complex hydrodynamics of an animal movement.

Our study demonstrated the platform’s capability for studying freely-moving model organisms. In the future, we seek
to explore the biomechanics of Hydra movement further (e.g., quantifying displacements generated by the animals or
systematically exploring animals’ response to pulsatile ﬂow). Microﬂuidics combined with conventional imaging has
provided excellent platforms to study model systems such as zebraﬁsh, Drosophila embryos, and C. elegans [36, 37].
Other emerging model systems could (and indeed have started to) beneﬁt from need-driven systematic integration of
micro and milliﬂuidics and novel imaging techniques [38, 39, 40]. SPIM-Flow, as a simple and inexpensive platform,
can contribute to these studies with a focus on hydrodynamics of small animals.

5

SPIM-Flow: An integrated light-sheet and microﬂuidics platform for Hydrodynamic Studies of Hydra

Acknowledgments

The authors express gratitude to Prof. Albert Siryaporn for his support.
This work was supported in part by CSULB startup funds and a CSUPRB research grant to SA.
Additionally, this work was supported by National Institutes of General Medical Sciences R21GM135493 to PNH.
LD is supported by an NSF GRFP (base number 2021317020).

Corresponding Authors Addresses

Siavash Ahrar (Ph.D.)
Mail: Department of Biomedical Engineering, CSU Long Beach, 1250 Bellﬂower Blvd.
VEC-404.A, Long Beach, CA 90840, E-mail: siavash.ahrar@csulb.edu

Per Niklas Hedde (Ph.D.)
E-mail: phedde@uci.edu

Afﬁliations

• PNH: Beckman Laser Institute and Medical Clinic, University of California Irvine, CA, US.
• ELG: Department of Biomedical Engineering. CSU Long Beach, CA, US.
• LD: Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry,University of California Irvine, CA, US.
• RES: Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California Irvine, CA, US.
• SA: Department of Biomedical Engineering. CSU Long Beach, CA, US.

Department of Physics and and Astronomy, University of California Irvine, CA, US.

6

SPIM-Flow: An integrated light-sheet and microﬂuidics platform for Hydrodynamic Studies of Hydra

List of Figures:

• Figure 1: SPIM-Flow system diagram.
• Figure 2: Baseline behaviors during static conditions as an indicator for overall health.
• Figure 3: Baseline behaviors, bending and tentacle movement, during static conditions.
• Figure 4: Response to ﬂow.
• Figure 5: Hydrodynamic visualization via FlowTrace.

List of Supplementary Figures:

• Sup Figure 1: Hydra feeding behavior as an indicator for health.
• Sup Figure 2: Hydra baseline behavior, elongation, during static conditions as an indicator for overall health.
• Sup Figure 3: Hydra responses to the initiation of ﬂow.
• Sup Figure 4: FlowTrace visualizations - response to ﬂow.
• Sup Figure 5: Imaging Hydra via a standard ﬂuorescent microscope.

List of Supplementary Videos:

• Movie S1: Hydra feeding behavior
• Movie S2: Hydra tentacle sway behavior
• Movie S3: Hydra response to ﬂow
• Movie S4: FlowTrace - example 1 (vortex)
• Movie S5: FlowTrace - response to ﬂow example 2

7

SPIM-Flow: An integrated light-sheet and microﬂuidics platform for Hydrodynamic Studies of Hydra

References

[1] Ernst HK Stelzer, Frederic Strobl, Bo-Jui Chang, Friedrich Preusser, Stephan Preibisch, Katie McDole, and Reto

Fiolka. Light sheet ﬂuorescence microscopy. Nature Reviews Methods Primers, 1(1):1–25, 2021.

[2] Jan Huisken, Jim Swoger, Filippo Del Bene, Joachim Wittbrodt, and Ernst HK Stelzer. Optical sectioning deep

inside live embryos by selective plane illumination microscopy. Science, 305(5686):1007–1009, 2004.

[3] Omar E Olarte, Jordi Andilla, Emilio J Gualda, and Pablo Loza-Alvarez. Light-sheet microscopy: a tutorial.

Advances in Optics and Photonics, 10(1):111–179, 2018.

[4] Fabian F Voigt, Daniel Kirschenbaum, Evgenia Platonova, Robert AA Campbell, Rahel Kastli, Martina Schaettin,

Ladan Egolf, Alexander Van der Bourg, Philipp Bethge, Karen Haenraets, et al. The mesospim initiative:
open-source light-sheet microscopes for imaging cleared tissue. Nature methods, 16(11):1105–1108, 2019.

[5] Emilio J Gualda, Hugo Pereira, Tiago Vale, Marta Falcão Estrada, Catarina Brito, and Nuno Moreno. Spim-ﬂuid:
open source light-sheet based platform for high-throughput imaging. Biomedical optics express, 6(11):4447–4456,
2015.

[6] Bin Yang, Merlin Lange, Alfred Millett-Sikking, Xiang Zhao, Jordão Bragantini, Shruthi VijayKumar, Mason
Kamb, Rafael Gómez-Sjöberg, Ahmet Can Solak, Wanpeng Wang, et al. Daxi—high-resolution, large imaging
volume and multi-view single-objective light-sheet microscopy. Nature methods, 19(4):461–469, 2022.

[7] Per Niklas Hedde. minispim—a miniaturized light-sheet microscope. ACS sensors, 6(7):2654–2663, 2021.

[8] Per Niklas Hedde, Milka Stakic, and Enrico Gratton. Rapid measurement of molecular transport and interaction

inside living cells using single plane illumination. Scientiﬁc reports, 4(1):1–6, 2014.

[9] Etai Sapoznik, Bo-Jui Chang, Jaewon Huh, Robert J Ju, Evgenia V Azarova, Theresa Pohlkamp, Erik S Welf,
David Broadbent, Alexandre F Carisey, Samantha J Stehbens, et al. A versatile oblique plane microscope for
large-scale and high-resolution imaging of subcellular dynamics. Elife, 9:e57681, 2020.

[10] William C Lemon, Stefan R Pulver, Burkhard Höckendorf, Katie McDole, Kristin Branson, Jeremy Freeman, and
Philipp J Keller. Whole-central nervous system functional imaging in larval drosophila. Nature communications,
6(1):1–16, 2015.

[11] Ludovico Silvestri, Alessandro Bria, Irene Costantini, Leonardo Sacconi, Hanchuan Peng, Giulio Iannello, and
Francesco Saverio Pavone. Micron-scale resolution optical tomography of entire mouse brains with confocal light
sheet microscopy. JoVE (Journal of Visualized Experiments), (80):e50696, 2013.

[12] Daniel Von Wangenheim, Robert Hauschild, and Jiˇrí Friml. Light sheet ﬂuorescence microscopy of plant roots

growing on the surface of a gel. JoVE (Journal of Visualized Experiments), (119):e55044, 2017.

[13] Hiroki R Ueda, Hans-Ulrich Dodt, Pavel Osten, Michael N Economo, Jayaram Chandrashekar, and Philipp J
Keller. Whole-brain proﬁling of cells and circuits in mammals by tissue clearing and light-sheet microscopy.
Neuron, 106(3):369–387, 2020.

[14] Pan Zhou, Haipeng He, Hanbin Ma, Shurong Wang, and Siyi Hu. A review of optical imaging technologies for

microﬂuidics. Micromachines, 13(2):274, 2022.

[15] Ignacio Albert-Smet, Asier Marcos-Vidal, Juan José Vaquero, Manuel Desco, Arrate Muñoz-Barrutia, and Jorge

Ripoll. Applications of light-sheet microscopy in microdevices. Frontiers in neuroanatomy, 13:1, 2019.

[16] Raju Regmi, Kavya Mohan, and Partha P Mondal. Light sheet based imaging ﬂow cytometry on a microﬂuidic

platform. Microscopy research and technique, 76(11):1101–1107, 2013.

[17] Meiai Lin, Qiao Liu, Chao Liu, Xu Qiao, Changshun Shao, and Xuantao Su. Label-free light-sheet microﬂuidic
cytometry for the automatic identiﬁcation of senescent cells. Biomedical optics express, 9(4):1692–1703, 2018.

[18] Yu-Jui Fan, Han-Yun Hsieh, Sheng-Fang Tsai, Cheng-Hsuan Wu, Chia-Ming Lee, Yen-Ting Liu, Chieh-Han Lu,
Shu-Wei Chang, and Bi-Chang Chen. Microﬂuidic channel integrated with a lattice lightsheet microscopic system
for continuous cell imaging. Lab on a Chip, 21(2):344–354, 2021.

8

SPIM-Flow: An integrated light-sheet and microﬂuidics platform for Hydrodynamic Studies of Hydra

[19] Hao Jiang, Tingting Zhu, Hao Zhang, Jun Nie, Zeyi Guan, Chi-Ming Ho, Sheng Liu, and Peng Fei. Droplet-based
light-sheet ﬂuorescence microscopy for high-throughput sample preparation, 3-d imaging and quantitative
analysis on a chip. Lab on a Chip, 17(13):2193–2197, 2017.

[20] Gilles Vanwalleghem, Kevin Schuster, Michael A Taylor, Itia A Favre-Bulle, and Ethan K Scott. Brain-wide

mapping of water ﬂow perception in zebraﬁsh. Journal of Neuroscience, 40(21):4130–4144, 2020.

[21] Per Niklas Hedde, Leonel Malacrida, Siavash Ahrar, Albert Siryaporn, and Enrico Gratton. sidespim–selective
plane illumination based on a conventional inverted microscope. Biomedical Optics Express, 8(9):3918–3937,
2017.

[22] Matthias C Vogg, Brigitte Galliot, and Charisios D Tsiairis. Model systems for regeneration: Hydra.

Development, 146(21):dev177212, 2019.

[23] William M Kier. The diversity of hydrostatic skeletons. Journal of Experimental Biology, 215(8):1247–1257,

2012.

[24] Shuting Han, Ekaterina Taralova, Christophe Dupre, and Rafael Yuste. Comprehensive machine learning analysis

of hydra behavior reveals a stable basal behavioral repertoire. Elife, 7:e32605, 2018.

[25] Jason A Carter, Callen Hyland, Robert E Steele, and Eva-Maria S Collins. Dynamics of mouth opening in hydra.

Biophysical journal, 110(5):1191–1201, 2016.

[26] Richard D Campbell. Structure of the mouth of hydra spp. a breach in the epithelium that disappears when it

closes. Cell and tissue research, 249(1):189–197, 1987.

[27] Krishna N Badhiwala, Daniel L Gonzales, Daniel G Vercosa, Benjamin W Avants, and Jacob T Robinson.

Microﬂuidics for electrophysiology, imaging, and behavioral analysis of hydra. Lab on a Chip,
18(17):2523–2539, 2018.

[28] Krishna N Badhiwala, Abby S Primack, Celina E Juliano, and Jacob T Robinson. Multiple neuronal networks

coordinate hydra mechanosensory behavior. Elife, 10:e64108, 2021.

[29] Robert E Steele, Megan D Updegrove, Sara A Kirolos, Lucas Mowery, Daniel E Martinez, and Peter J Bryant.

Reproductive bet-hedging and existence in vernal pools as components of hydra life history. The Biological
Bulletin, 237(2):111–118, 2019.

[30] Abraham Trembley. Mémoires pour servir à l’histoire d’un genre de ploypes d’eau douce, à bras en forme de

cornes, volume 1. Durand, 1744.

[31] Edmund B Wilson. The heliotropism of hydra. The American Naturalist, 25(293):413–433, 1891.

[32] Gottfried Haug. Die lichtreaktionen der hydren. Zeitschrift für vergleichende Physiologie, 19(2):246–303, 1933.

[33] Robert H Singer, Norman B Rushforth, and Allison L Burnett. The photodynamic action of light on hydra.

Journal of Experimental Zoology, 154(2):169–173, 1963.

[34] William Gilpin, Vivek N Prakash, and Manu Prakash. Flowtrace: simple visualization of coherent structures in

biological ﬂuid ﬂows. Journal of Experimental Biology, 220(19):3411–3418, 2017.

[35] William Gilpin, Vivek N Prakash, and Manu Prakash. Dynamic vortex arrays created by starﬁsh larvae. Physical

Review Fluids, 2(9):090501, 2017.

[36] Anna A Kim, Adam L Nekimken, Sylvia Fechner, Lucy E O’Brien, and Beth L Pruitt. Microﬂuidics for

mechanobiology of model organisms. In Methods in cell biology, volume 146, pages 217–259. Elsevier, 2018.

[37] Hyundoo Hwang and Hang Lu. Microﬂuidic tools for developmental studies of small model
organisms–nematodes, fruit ﬂies, and zebraﬁsh. Biotechnology journal, 8(2):192–205, 2013.

[38] Deepak Krishnamurthy, Hongquan Li, François Benoit du Rey, Pierre Cambournac, Adam G Larson, Ethan Li,
and Manu Prakash. Scale-free vertical tracking microscopy. Nature Methods, 17(10):1040–1051, 2020.

[39] Felix JH Hol, Louis Lambrechts, and Manu Prakash. Biteoscope, an open platform to study mosquito biting

behavior. Elife, 9:e56829, 2020.

9

SPIM-Flow: An integrated light-sheet and microﬂuidics platform for Hydrodynamic Studies of Hydra

[40] Shailabh Kumar, Felix JH Hol, Sujit Pujhari, Clayton Ellington, Haripriya Vaidehi Narayanan, Hongquan Li,
Jason L Rasgon, and Manu Prakash. A microﬂuidic platform for highly parallel bite by bite proﬁling of
mosquito-borne pathogen transmission. Nature communications, 12(1):1–12, 2021.

10

SPIM-Flow: An integrated light-sheet and microﬂuidics platform for Hydrodynamic Studies of Hydra

Supplemental section - analysis of light sheet properties

The Rayleigh criterion deﬁnes the optical resolution, r, as:

where λ is the wavelength and NA the numerical aperture of the lens.

For small aperture lenses, the NA can be approximated by:

r = 0.61 λ
N A

NA = n D
2f

where D is the lens diameter, f the lens focal length, and n the refractive index of the surrounding medium, which in our
case was air (n = 1).

Combining the two equations yields:

With an excitation wavelength of 488 nm, a beam diameter of 1 mm, and the focal length of the cylindrical lens of 12
mm, the light sheet minimum thickness was 7.1 µm.

r = 1.22 λf
D

11

SPIM-Flow: An integrated light-sheet and microﬂuidics platform for Hydrodynamic Studies of Hydra

Figure 1: SPIM-Flow system diagram. (A) Simple and inexpensive SPIM designed for compatibility with ﬂuidics.
(B) Photograph of the excitation arm (i.e., light cannon), microﬂuidic chamber held on the 3D printed stage, and the
objective lens collecting ﬂuorescent signals from the chamber. (C) Diagram of the PDMS chamber with its critical
dimensions, stage and the Light cannon. Steps were taken to remove any roughness from the side of the chamber that
accepts the light and to remove any rough edges that could create imaging artifacts.

Figure 2: Baseline behavior during static conditions as an indicator for overall health. (A) Elongation and tentacle
movement. The head (hypostome and tentacle ring) are also visible. (B) A different animal in an elongated state inside
a chamber. Using SPIM-Flow, GFP-positive neurons can be visualized depending on the orientation and state of the
Hydra.

12

SPIM-Flow: An integrated light-sheet and microﬂuidics platform for Hydrodynamic Studies of Hydra

Figure 3: Baseline behaviors, bending and tentacle movement, during static conditions. Yellow arrows point to
Artemia franciscana nauplii that were ignored by the Hydra after capturing 3 nauplii earlier.

Figure 4: Response to Flow. Our results suggest that Hydra typically bends and sways its tentacles in the direction of
the ﬂow. (A) Initiation of the ﬂow and redirection of the animal towards the ﬂow. White arrow demonstrates the ﬂow
direction (B) Reversing the ﬂow direction, led to the animal redirecting with the new ﬂow direction.

Figure 5: Hydrodynamic visualization via FlowTrace. (A) Original recording via SPIM-Flow. Flow starts at 4s. (B)
Extracting the pathline to visualize the ﬂow ﬁeld generated by and around Hydra via the FlowTrace algorithm.

13

SPIM-Flow: An integrated light-sheet and microﬂuidics platform for Hydrodynamic Studies of Hydra

Figure 6: Supplemental Figure 1 Hydra’s feeding behavior as an indicator for health. Arrow indicates tentacles
holding a Artemia franciscana nauplius (brine shrimp).

Figure 7: Supplemental Figure 2 Hydra’s baseline behavior in static conditions. Elongation state as an indicator
for overall health

14

SPIM-Flow: An integrated light-sheet and microﬂuidics platform for Hydrodynamic Studies of Hydra

Figure 8: Supplemental Figure 3 Responses to the initiation of ﬂow. (A) A Hydra contracting in response to the
ﬂow initiation. (B) A Hydra responding to the ﬂow initiation by tentacle swaying behavior. Additional experiments are
required to investigate the dynamic response of Hydra to various mechanical stimuli.

Figure 9: Supplemental Figure 4 FlowTrace visualizations. Pathlines corresponding to Hydra’s response to estab-
lished ﬂow. Data corresponds to results from Figure 4 from the main text.

15

SPIM-Flow: An integrated light-sheet and microﬂuidics platform for Hydrodynamic Studies of Hydra

Figure 10: Supplemental Figure 5 Imaging Hydra (N=2) via a standard ﬂuorescent microscope. Uisng a com-
mercialﬂuorescent microscope (Nikon Eclipse Ti-E microscope 10X objective) - with a Sola light engine (Lumencor,
Beaverton, OR), and 474/27 nm and 575/25 nm ﬁlters for excitation and 525/45 nm and 641/75 nm ﬁlters for emission
for the GFP and DsRed2 visualizations). More anatomical features can be visualized with the standard microscope
(. However, SPIM-Flow provides a frugal and simple alternative for hydrodynamic studies. Moreover, simultaneous
visualization of the animal and the beads with the standard microscope would require additional optimization.

16

