Astronomy & Astrophysics manuscript no. LSD_paper
August 8, 2022

©ESO 2022

Pushing Least-Squares Deconvolution to the next level: application
to binary stars*

A. Tkachenko1, V. Tsymbal2, S. Zvyagintsev2, H. Lehmann3, F. Petermann3, and D. E. Mkrtichian4

1 Institute of Astronomy, KU Leuven, Celestijnenlaan 200D, B-3001 Leuven, Belgium

e-mail: andrew.tkachenko@kuleuven.be

2 Institute of Astronomy, Russian Academy of Sciences, 119017, Pyatnitskaya str., 48, Moscow, Russia
3 Thüringer Landessternwarte Tautenburg, Sternwarte 5, 07778, Tautenburg, Germany
4 National Astronomical Research Institute of Thailand, 260 Moo 4, T. Donkaew, A. Maerim, Chiangmai, 50180 Thailand

Received September 15, 1996; accepted March 16, 1997

ABSTRACT

Context. Eclipsing, spectroscopic double-lined (SB2) binaries remain to be the prime source of precise and accurate fundamental
properties of stars. Furthermore, high-cadence spectroscopic observations of the eclipse phases allow us to resolve the Rossiter-
McLaughlin eﬀect whose modelling oﬀers the means to probe spin-orbit misalignment in binaries.
Aims. We aim to develop a method that provides precise and accurate measurements of radial velocities of both binary components,
including the in-eclipse orbital phases where line proﬁles are subject to large distortions due to the Rossiter-McLaughlin eﬀect. We
also intend to separate spectral contributions of the primary and secondary components in the velocity space such that a time-series
of the separated spectroscopic signals can be obtained throughout the binary orbit, preserving any line-proﬁle variability (LPV) that
might be present in either or both of those spectroscopic contributions.
Methods. In this study, we provide a generalisation of the Least-Squares Deconvolution (LSD) method to SB2 systems. Our LSDBi-
nary algorithm is capable of working with both in-eclipse and out-of-eclipse spectra as input and delivers the LSD proﬁles, LSD-based
model spectra, and precise RVs of both binary components as output. We oﬀer an option to account for the Rossiter-McLaughlin eﬀect
in the calculation of the initial guess LSD proﬁles and components’ ﬂux ratio such that the eﬀect can be modelled within the algo-
rithm itself. In that case, the algorithm delivers both the LSD proﬁles and RVs that are no longer distorted by the Rossiter-McLaughlin
eﬀect. Otherwise, when geometry of the Rossiter-McLaughlin eﬀect is ignored in the calculation of the initial guess, the LSDBinary
algorithm delivers a RV curve that contains contributions from both orbital motion of the star and spectral line distortions due to the
Rossiter-McLaughlin eﬀect.
Results. In this study, we provide an extensive test of the LSDBinary software package on simulated spectra of artiﬁcial binaries
resembling Algol-type systems and detached binaries with similar components. We study the eﬀects of signal-to-noise-ratio of input
spectra, resolving power of the instrument, uncertain atmospheric parameters of stars, and orbital properties of the binary system on
the resulting LSD proﬁles and RVs measured from them. We ﬁnd that atmospheric parameters have negligible eﬀect on the shape of
the computed LSD proﬁles while aﬀecting mostly their global scaling. High-resolution (R (cid:38)60 000) spectroscopic observations are
required to investigate the Rossiter-McLaughlin eﬀect in detail though a medium resolving power of R ≈25 000-30 000 might suﬃce
when the amplitude of the eﬀect is large. Our results are barely sensitive to signal-to-noise ratio of the input spectra provided they
contain suﬃcient number of spectral lines, such as in A-type stars and later. Finally, the orbital inclination angle and components’
radii ratio are found to have the largest eﬀect on the shapes of the LSD proﬁles and RV curves extracted from them.
Conclusions. The LSDBinary algorithm is speciﬁcally developed to perform detailed spectroscopic studies of eclipsing SB2 systems
whose orbital conﬁguration and components’ atmospheric parameters are estimated by other means. The algorithm is well suited to
study the Rossiter-McLaughlin eﬀect as well as to compute the separated LSD proﬁles of both binary components from the observed
composite in-eclipse spectra of SB2 systems.

Key words. methods: data analysis – methods: observational – techniques: spectroscopic – (stars:) binaries: eclipsing – (stars:)
binaries: spectroscopic

1. Introduction

Stellar astrophysics has received an impressive boost with the
launch and successful in-orbit operations of such space mis-
sions as the Microvariability and Oscillations of Stars (MOST,
Walker et al. 2003), Convection, Rotation, and planetary Transits
(CoRoT, Auvergne et al. 2009), Kepler/K2 (Borucki et al. 2010;
Howell et al. 2014), and Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite
(TESS Ricker et al. 2015). While the ﬁrst three missions have
been retired in the meantime, TESS remains currently opera-

* The code is publicly available here: https://github.com/AndrewStSp/

LSDBinary.

tional and holds potential to continue its science operations for
as long as until 2030-2035. Furthermore, the PLAnetary Tran-
sits and Oscillations of stars (PLATO, Rauer et al. 2014) Euro-
pean Space Agency mission is being planned for lunch in the fall
2026 and will continue the tradition of collecting large amounts
of nearly uninterrupted, long time-base, ultra-high precision and
duty cycle space-based photometry of stars and stellar systems.
Space-based photometric observations of stars and their en-
sembles are often complemented with ground-based spectro-
scopic observations enabling stellar astrophysics studies of un-
precedented level of precision. For example, it has recently
been demonstrated with asteroseismology (Aerts et al. 2010)

Article number, page 1 of 17

2
2
0
2

g
u
A
5

]

R
S
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
2
7
0
3
0
.
8
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
A&A proofs: manuscript no. LSD_paper

that models of stellar interior structure and evolution have
largely incomplete treatment of angular momentum transport for
intermediate- to high-mass stars (e.g. Mosser et al. 2012; Beck
et al. 2012; Cantiello et al. 2014; Kawaler 2015; Aerts et al.
2017, 2019; Aerts 2021). These ﬁndings have in turn driven new
theoretical developments that concern physics of internal gravity
waves (e.g. Rogers et al. 2013; Rogers 2015; Fuller et al. 2015a)
and internal magnetic ﬁelds (e.g. Fuller et al. 2015b, 2019).

Parallel to detailed asteroseismic studies of interior structure
of stars, the ﬁeld of binary stars and multiple systems has also
received an unprecedented boost thanks to the above-mentioned
space missions. Nowadays, binary stars of various orbital and
stellar type conﬁgurations are being found and observed in num-
bers, many of those also contain intrinsically variable stellar
components (e.g., Slawson et al. 2011; Matijeviˇc et al. 2012;
Conroy et al. 2014; Kirk et al. 2016; Sekaran et al. 2020; IJspeert
et al. 2021). Co-existence of intrinsic variability of stars and
binarity enables powerful synergies, where in particular astero-
seismic studies beneﬁt from knowledge of highly precise funda-
mental properties of stars that come from binary dynamics (e.g.,
Schmid et al. 2015; Schmid & Aerts 2016; Johnston et al. 2019;
Sekaran et al. 2021) while new aspects of tidal evolution theory
can be developed and observationally veriﬁed thanks to interac-
tions between stellar oscillations, magnetism, and binarity. This
way, theory of tidal excitation of stellar pulsations could recently
be tested and improved thanks to discovery and detailed obser-
vational studies of tidally-induced pulsations in close binary sys-
tems (e.g., Welsh et al. 2011; Fuller & Lai 2012; Fuller et al.
2013; Fuller 2017). At the same time, the eﬀects of tides on self-
excited stellar pulsations are also being actively studied and their
interactions are being quantiﬁed (e.g., Bowman et al. 2019; Han-
dler et al. 2020; Fuller et al. 2020; Fuller 2021). Furthermore, it
has been recently shown that observational incidence of global
magnetic ﬁelds of presumably fossil origin among intermediate-
to high-mass isolated stars amounts to some 5-10% (e.g., Ale-
cian et al. 2019; Mathys 2017). Yet, there is a dearth of magnetic
intermediate- to high-mass stars in close, short-period binaries,
which is now claimed to be due to dissipation of the fossil mag-
netic ﬁelds by the turbulent magnetic diﬀusion induced by the
saturated tidal ﬂows (Vidal et al. 2019).

Besides serving as natural laboratories to study physics of
interactions, binary stars are essential objects in galactic, stellar
evolution, and distance scale context. First and foremost, the fac-
tion of stars found in binary and higher order multiple systems
ranges from some 40% for solar-like stars (Cohen et al. 2020a)
and up to some 55-60% for intermediate- to high-mass stars
(e.g., Cohen et al. 2020b; Bodensteiner et al. 2021; Banyard et al.
2022), hence any galactic-scale study that relies on the stellar
component has to take the phenomenon of binarity into consider-
ation. Furthermore, spectroscopic double-lined (SB2) eclipsing
binaries are a prime source of precise and accurate fundamen-
tal properties of stars. With the stellar masses and radii being
measured with accuracy better than 3% (e.g., Torres et al. 2010;
Tkachenko et al. 2014; Debosscher et al. 2013; Pavlovski et al.
2009, 2014, 2018; Southworth 2013, 2021), such binary systems
provide one of the most stringent observational tests of stellar
structure and evolution models. This way, it has been demon-
strated that low-mass stars in binaries tend to have radii that in-
ﬂated by some 5-15% compared to the respective non-magnetic
model predictions (e.g., Ribas 2006). Inclusion of the magnetic
ﬁelds in these models helps to resolve the issue (e.g., MacDon-
ald & Mullan 2017) demonstrating the eﬃciency of binaries in
probing and improving stellar models in the regime of low-mass
(M-type) stars. Similarly, binarity is being exploited to test inte-

Article number, page 2 of 17

rior physics in the models of intermediate- to high-mass stars in
a way that is independent of and complementary to the method
of asteroseismology. This way, several studies oﬀer probes of the
level of core-boundary mixing in the form of the convective core
overshooting (Guinan et al. 2000; Claret & Torres 2016, 2017,
2018, 2019; Martinet et al. 2021), while others go as far as to re-
port the pertinent need for higher convective core masses in mod-
els of intermediate- to high-mass stars (e.g., Tkachenko et al.
2020; Johnston 2021). In addition, interferometric eclipsing SB2
systems provide the means of measuring their accurate dynam-
ical parallaxes, hence oﬀering an important reference for astro-
metric missions such as Hipparcos and Gaia (e.g., Gallenne et al.
2019; Pavlovski et al. 2022). Last but not least, eclipsing (binary)
and transiting (exoplanet) systems oﬀer a unique opportunity to
study the eﬀects of spin-orbit (mis)alignment through observa-
tions and interpretation of the Rossiter-McLaughlin (RM) eﬀect
(e.g., Rossiter 1924; McLaughlin 1924; Albrecht et al. 2012; Tri-
aud 2018; Wang et al. 2018; Addison et al. 2018; Kamiaka et al.
2019).

With the amount, and more importantly unprecedented qual-
ity of (space-based) photometric and (ground-based) spectro-
scopic observations available nowadays, considerable time and
eﬀort are being spent to improve methods and techniques for the
analysis of stars in binary and higher order multiple systems. For
example, following the development of binary light curve anal-
ysis algorithms such as Wilson-Devinney (Wilson & Devinney
1971), Phoebe (Prša & Zwitter 2005), and jktebop (Southworth
et al. 2004) in the pre-space missions era, new methods such as
those implemented in the ellc (Maxted 2016) and Phoebe 2.0
(Prša et al. 2013; Degroote et al. 2013; Prša 2018; Conroy et al.
2019, 2020, 2021) codes are being developed, that are both more
eﬃcient and often include a better treatment of physics in them.
In spectroscopy, the original method of cross-correlation (e.g.,
Bracewell 1965) has been commonly used in the past but proved
impractical in many cases due to its strong dependence on the
underlying template (synthetic) spectrum and inability to pick
line proﬁle variations intrinsic to the star (unless exceptionally
strong, e.g. in large amplitude radially pulsating stars). Yet, two-
dimensional cross-correlation analysis (e.g., as implemented in
the TODCOR software package, Mazeh & Zucker 1994) is of-
ten used for the RV determination in SB2 systems, despite the
above-mentioned dependence on underlying model and number
of degeneracies this method is subject to. A considerable im-
provement has been achieved with the introduction of the broad-
ening function method (Rucinski 1992), which is diﬀerent from
the original method of cross-correlation in that it uses a tem-
plate that is not subject to spectral line broadening mechanisms
such as stellar rotation and/or macroturbulence. This makes the
method less model-dependent in the sense that small deviations
of the template parameters from the true properties of the star
are less critical for the overall shape of the obtained broadening
function. In addition, the use of a template that incorporates only
the intrinsic (e.g., thermal) broadening of spectral lines allows us
to resolve ﬁne structures in the ensemble of lines in the observed
stellar spectrum and enables detection and further analysis of
line proﬁle variations caused by intrinsic variability of the star.

The need to achieve extremely high signal-to-noise ratio
(S/N) to be able to detected low-amplitude magnetic signatures
in polarisation spectra has driven development of the Least-
Squares Deconvolution (LSD; Donati et al. 1997) multi-line av-
eraging technique. The LSD proﬁles obtained with this methods
are also ideal for inference of radial velocities of stars (including
those in binary systems) and to study temporal spectral changes
due to intrinsic variability of stars. In this paper, we present a

A. Tkachenko et al.: Pushing Least-Squares Deconvolution to the next level: application to binary stars

generalisation of the original LSD method to binary stars. In par-
ticular, we focus on the determination of precise, orbital phase-
resolved radial velocities (RV) of the individual binary compo-
nents with a careful treatment of the Rossiter-McLaughlin eﬀect.
In Section 2, we provide a short introduction to the original LSD
method as well as the literature overview with respect to the re-
cent improvements and generalisations of the method. Our own
generalisation of the method to spectroscopic double-lined bi-
naries is described in detail in Section 3. The method is further
tested and validated on artiﬁcial spectra of SB2 stars in Section 4,
where we also touch upon its applicability range and limitations.
We close the paper with conclusions and an outline of future
prospects in Section 5.

2. The least-squares deconvolution (LSD) method

The LSD method was originally introduced by Donati et al.
(1997) with the purpose of detection and measurement of weak
surface magnetic ﬁelds from polarised spectra of stars. In its
original formulation, the method relies on the following two
fundamental assumptions: 1) all spectral lines in the considered
spectral interval have similar proﬁle shape, and 2) all lines in the
spectrum add up strictly linear. Assuming both conditions are
adequate for representing a stellar spectrum, the least-squares
deconvolution problem can be formulated as a convolution of an
a priori unknown average proﬁle Z(υ) with a pre-computed line
mask M

I = M ∗ Z(υ),

(1)

where υ and I stand for the velocity and model spectrum, re-
spectively, while the line mask M represents a set of delta func-
tions (wavelength vs. predicted central line depths). The concept
of representing observed spectrum as a convolution of a priori
unknown average proﬁle with a list of delta functions allows
to boost S/N signiﬁcantly. The exact amount of the S/N boost
depends on spectral type of the star and wavelength range em-
ployed for the calculation of LSD proﬁles, and is typically any-
where between a factor of 5 to 50. Such a large increase in S/N
of the data in turn enables the detection of stellar surface mag-
netic ﬁelds as week as a few tens of Gauss from the originally
moderate S/N polarisation spectra (e.g., Blazère et al. 2016a,b;
Kochukhov et al. 2019).

In practice, neither of the above two fundamental assump-
tions is fulﬁlled. It is a well known fact that strong (close to res-
onance) lines diﬀer substantially in shape from their weak coun-
terparts, and that lines with pronounced damping wings (e.g.,
Balmer lines in the spectra of main-sequence intermediate-mass
stars and/or magnesium lines in solar-like stars) exhibit shapes
that are very distinct from any other type of spectral lines in the
spectrum. Furthermore, it is fair to assume that individual spec-
tral lines add up linearly when blending occurs due to a super-
position of two stellar spectra (i.e., the case of a double-lined
spectroscopic binary) and/or due to a large rotational broaden-
ing. However, the above assumption is no longer valid when
absorption coeﬃcients of two or more neighbouring lines over-
lap in wavelength, which results in a non-linear addition of the
lines forming a blend. Both these limitations give rise to non-
negligible uncertainties in the predicted intensities of spectral
lines in the model spectrum I obtained by a convolution of the
LSD proﬁle Z(υ) with the input line mask M. This implies that
LSD proﬁles computed from a time-series of observed spectra
can be studied with respect to time-dependent variability they ex-
hibit, however each of these LSD proﬁles separately can hardly

be interpreted as an isolated spectral line with properties aver-
aged across the ensemble of spectral lines the LSD proﬁle is
computed from (Kochukhov et al. 2010).

Several studies have suggested improvements to the original
LSD technique with the ultimate goal to overcome major short-
comings of the method associated with its fundamental assump-
tions. Sennhauser et al. (2009) and Sennhauser & Berdyugina
(2010) propose to use the Minnaert’s analytical expression (Min-
naert 1935) to account for non-linearity in spectral line blending
when it comes to representation of strong, optically thick lines.
The authors demonstrate that their method of nonlinear decon-
volution with deblending (NDD) oﬀers a better representation of
blended spectra than the original LSD method that assumes lin-
earity. Kochukhov et al. (2010) propose an improved method of
least–squares deconvolution (iLSD) which includes option of a
multiproﬁle LSD that represents stellar spectrum as a superposi-
tion of an arbitrary number of scaled average proﬁles. The iLSD
method oﬀers the opportunity of grouping spectral lines accord-
ing to their predicted depths and representing each of the above
groups with its own average proﬁle. Given that weak and strong
lines tend to show signiﬁcant diﬀerence in their proﬁle shapes,
the approach proposed by Kochukhov et al. (2010) allows for
partial compensation of one of the fundamental assumptions in
the original formulation of the method, namely a shared proﬁle
shape between all spectral lines engaged in the calculation of the
LSD proﬁle. Furthermore, the authors demonstrate that the LSD
proﬁle cannot be interpreted as a real spectral line with average
properties when it comes to Stokes I (intensity) and Stokes Q
(linear polarisation) spectra. At the same time, the Stokes V av-
erage proﬁles do resemble closely the behaviour of an isolated
line with average properties, provided global magnetic ﬁeld is
weaker than some 1 kG.

Tkachenko et al. (2013) elaborate further on the idea by
Kochukhov et al. (2010) and implement in their approach a pos-
sibility to include multiple line masks (cid:80)N
i=1 Mi along with a mul-
tiproﬁle LSD. In particular, such approach allows one to com-
pute composite average proﬁles from spectra of double-lined bi-
nary stars, taking into account diﬀerence in atmospheric param-
eters and chemical composition of the two binary components.
Furthermore, the authors implement a line-strength correction
algorithm that aims to improve upon the LSD representation of
the stellar spectrum. Corrections are applied to the line strengths
locally by minimising the diﬀerences between the observed and
LSD-based model spectra. These corrections are pure mathemat-
ical and cannot be interpreted in terms of physics of stellar atmo-
spheres, yet they allow for a signiﬁcantly improved representa-
tion of the LSD-based model spectrum. The latter will have a
much higher S/N than the original observed spectrum, hence the
procedure by Tkachenko et al. (2013) oﬀers an eﬃcient way of
denoising stellar spectra.

Lastly, Asensio Ramos & Petit (2015) implement the LSD
algorithm under the Bayesian framework which enables fast cal-
culation of the LSD average proﬁle with a Gaussian prior. Stra-
chan & Anglada-Escudé (2017) introduce a method of diﬀeren-
tial least-squares deconvolution (dLSD) that employs a high S/N
combined spectrum of the star as a template and searches for a
convolution kernel that needs to match the template to an obser-
vation of the star. The method is developed speciﬁcally to study
planet-star obliquity through the interpretation of the observed
Rossiter-McLaughlin eﬀect.

Article number, page 3 of 17

A&A proofs: manuscript no. LSD_paper

3. LSDBinary: generalisation of the LSD method to

spectroscopic double-lined binaries

The LSD method is by design sensitive to signals that are com-
mon to the majority of spectral lines in stellar spectrum. There-
fore, even under the assumption of a single line mask M, LSD
remains a powerful method for detection of SB2 binary sys-
tems. For example, the LSD proﬁle computed from the compos-
ite spectrum of a SB2 system and employing a line mask cor-
responding to the primary component, will contain signatures
of both binary components with a caveat that contribution of
the secondary component to the LSD proﬁle will be somewhat
diluted. Measuring RVs and/or studying line proﬁle variations
(LPV) of individual binary components in these composite LSD
proﬁle still proves nearly as diﬃcult as from the original ob-
served composite spectra because, despite the signiﬁcantly en-
hanced S/N in the LSD proﬁle, line blending remains the domi-
nant source of uncertainty. In practice, this means that the origi-
nal LSD method as well as its numerous generalisations outlined
in Section 2, despite being eﬀective for the detection of SB2 sys-
tems, are however not suitable for the calculation of LSD proﬁles
of the individual binary components and inference of their pre-
cise RVs thereof.

In this paper, we present a generalisation of the original
LSD method to SB2 binary star systems. In particular, we fo-
cus on separation of spectral contributions of the individual
binary components in velocity space to the level of precision
that would enable inference of precise and accurate RVs of
both stars and, if possible, resolving their LPVs. In doing so,
we focus primarily on the diﬃcult case of the in-eclipse or-
bital phases that are characterised by high degree of blend-
ing, while we pay little attention to the out-of-eclipse phases
where spectral contributions of the two stars can typically be
easily separated from each other. This speciﬁc focus on the in-
eclipse spectra is made solely for the purpose of demonstrating
the algorithm’s performance in the most diﬃcult circumstances,
while the algorithm is designed such as to handle all orbital
phases in the spectroscopic observations of eclipsing SB2 sys-
tems. As a baseline, we adopt the modiﬁed LSD method by
Tkachenko et al. (2013) that employs a modiﬁed, fast version
of the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm (Marquardt 1963) imple-
mented by Piskunov & Kochukhov (2002). The algorithm has
the capabilities as outlined in the previous section and serves as
the “central engine” of the LSDBinary software package pre-
sented here.

3.1. Pseudo-code
Figure 1 provides a ﬂow chart of the LSDBinary software pack-
age with the three main components - input, central engine, and
output - being indicated. Here, we provide a more detailed de-
scription of the entire process, in the form of a pseudo-code:

1. The LSDinit algorithm comprises three (optionally four) ma-
jor steps (see below), whose purpose is to take care of all
necessary preparations for the core calculations with the LS-
DBinary algorithm. In this module, we set up initial guesses
for the individual LSD proﬁles, wavelength-dependent ﬂux
ratio of the two stars, and pre-compute local corrections to
the LSD model spectrum to ensure its closest match to the
observations. The three (optionally four) above-mentioned
steps are:
– The SynthV radiative transfer code (Tsymbal 1996) is
employed to compute synthetic spectra in an arbitrary

Article number, page 4 of 17

wavelength range, with options for variable microturbu-
lent velocity and chemical composition of the star, in-
cluding possibility for their vertical stratiﬁcation. Spectra
are synthesised for diﬀerent positions on the stellar disk
to account for centre-to-limb intensity variations, also
known as the limb darkening eﬀect. The SynthV code is
publicly available and its latest version is distributed as
part of the LSDBinary package. However, SynthV can
also be replaced with any other one’s favourite radiative
transfer code provided its output is tuned to the input re-
quirements of the LSDBinary code.

– The Convolve code (Tsymbal 1996) performs integration
of speciﬁc intensities over the visible stellar disk and the
convolution of the obtained spectrum with the Gaussian
proﬁle with the Full Width at Half Maximum (FWHM)
corresponding to resolving power R of the instrument,
the projected rotational velocity v sin i of the star, and
optionally the macroturbulent velocity. The macroturbu-
lent broadening is implemented in the radial-tangential
formalism following Gray (1992).

– The Rossiter-McLaughlin Eﬀect (rme) algorithm can be
used as an alternative to calculation of the disk-integrated
synthetic spectra with the SynthV and Convolve suit of
codes and is therefore an optional step. The rme algo-
rithm, as the name suggests, allows us to compute time-
series of the in-eclipse synthetic spectra subject to distor-
tion caused by the Rossiter-McLaughlin eﬀect (Rossiter
1924; McLaughlin 1924) and the associated variable
with orbital phase binary components’ ﬂux ratio. RME
is a geometric eﬀect that occurs when (stellar or plane-
tary) companion transits across the disk of rotating pri-
mary component and blocks part of its visible surface. In
doing so, the companion also blocks part of either blue
(ingress) or red (egress)-shifted (due to stellar rotation)
light of the primary component causing asymmetries in
its observed line proﬁles. Our rme algorithm solves the
problem analytically by computing the surface area of
the eclipsed star that is being blocked by the compan-
ion and performs the disk integration over its remaining
visible part of the disk. The rme algorithm relies on or-
bital conﬁguration of the system as input and delivers
distorted line proﬁles and orbital phase-dependent com-
ponents’ ﬂux ratio to be used for the calculation of initial
guess LSD proﬁles (see below) for the in-eclipse phases.
Therefore, the option of using the rme algorithm is best
suitable for binary systems whose orbital conﬁguration is
know in advance, though the algorithm does not require
the orbital parameters to be know with particularly high
precision and/or accuracy.

– The LSDsynth algorithm is designed to compute the-
oretical LSD proﬁles for both binary components from
the corresponding disk-integrated synthetic spectra (with
or without the RME taken into account) and line masks.
To speed up calculations, the code employs as the initial
guess for the LSD proﬁle either a Gaussian proﬁle with
the FWHM corresponding to the resolving power R of
the instrument or a rotational kernel for the cases of
slow and moderate to rapid rotation, respectively. An
example of the synthetic LSD proﬁles computed with
the LSDsynth algorithm for both binary components is
shown in Figure 1 (bottom left panel). As discussed in
Section 2, due to the natal assumptions and limitations
of the original LSD method,
the LSD-based model
spectrum I computed by means of the convolution of

A. Tkachenko et al.: Pushing Least-Squares Deconvolution to the next level: application to binary stars

the LSD proﬁle Z(v) with the line mask M fails to
closely reproduce the input stellar spectrum the LSD
proﬁle is computed from. The LSDsynth algorithm
developed by us overcomes that problem by computing
and applying local corrections to line intensities in
the LSD-based model spectrum such as to provide its
closest match to the input synthetic stellar spectrum.
These relative intensity corrections take the following
form (rsynthetic − rmodel)/rmodel, where r stands for the
normalised ﬂux, while “synthetic” and “model” refer
to the input synthetic and LSD-based model stellar
spectrum, respectively. Therefore, these local intensity
fractional diﬀerences between
corrections represent
the input synthetic and LSD-based model spectra at
each wavelength point, and ensure the closest match
between the two when applied to the LSD-based model
the LSDsynth algorithm computes
spectrum. Lastly,
the ratio of binary component’s ﬂuxes as a function of
wavelength and approximates it with the polynomial of
second degree. An example of the functional form of this
wavelength-dependent ﬂux ratio is shown in Figure 1
(bottom left panel). Summarising,
taking synthetic
spectra and line masks as input, the LSDsynth algorithm
delivers: (i) initial guess synthetic spectra-based LSD
proﬁles, (ii) local fractional intensity corrections to the
LSD-based model spectrum, and (iii) best ﬁt polynomial
coeﬃcients that allow one to reproduce the wavelength-
dependent functional form of the components’ ﬂux ratio.

2. The LSDBinary algorithm represents the “core engine” of
the method and allows us to compute time series of the
LSD proﬁles of both binary components separated in veloc-
ity space.
– Input: The algorithm relies on the output of the LSDinit
module in terms of the initial guess for: (i) the syn-
thetic spectrum-based LSD proﬁles of both binary com-
ponents, (ii) local fractional intensity corrections to the
LSD-based model spectra of both stars, and (iii) func-
tional form of the components’ ﬂux ratio. In addition to
the above, the LSDBinary algorithm also requires ini-
tial guess for the RVs of both binary components, that
can be provided either in the form of a table, RV vs. or-
bital phase, or in the form of orbital parameters of the bi-
nary system. In the latter case, orbital phase resolved RVs
are computed from the provided orbital elements within
the LSDBinary module and are employed as the initial
guess. Lastly, LSDBinary requires two line masks, one
for each binary component, to be provided as well.

– Core calculations: LSDBinary utilizes the LSD algo-
rithm implemented in Tkachenko et al. (2013), in partic-
ular its functionality to compute multi-component LSD
proﬁles with the employment of multiple line masks.
We modify the algorithm such as to account for relative
contributions of the two binary components to the sys-
tem’s composite spectrum. These contributions are de-
ﬁned by the component’s ﬂux ratio whose wavelength-
dependent functional form is pre-computed within the
LSDinit module and their radii ratio. The latter pa-
rameter can be either ﬁxed (e.g., if it is known from
the binary light curve solution) or used as a free pa-
rameter in LSDBinary. The problem of solving for
the individual LSD proﬁles is approached in iterative
fashion with the employment of the modiﬁed version
of the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm (see above and

Piskunov & Kochukhov 2002). In each iteration, the al-
gorithm minimises the diﬀerence between the input ob-
served composite spectrum of the binary system and its
LSD-based composite model spectrum counterpart. The
latter is computed as a linear sum of the individual binary
components’ model spectra that are subject to their local
fractional intensity corrections before being added up.
– Output: The LSDBinary algorithm has Level-0 and
Level-1 output. The former refers to the individual LSD
proﬁles and the LSD-based model spectra. These model
spectra are provided for: (i) both binary components sep-
arately and are the product of the convolution of the pri-
mary and secondary LSD proﬁles with their respective
line masks, and taking the individual fractional intensity
corrections into account, and (ii) the binary system as
a whole, where the composite model spectrum is repre-
sented by the linear sum of the primary and secondary
LSD-based model spectra with the components’ ﬂux and
radii ratio being taken into account. On the other hand,
the Level-1 output refers to the quantities inferred di-
rectly from the LSD proﬁles and the process of their
calculation, i.e. from the Level-0 output. These quanti-
ties are the RVs of both binary components and, in case
it is set as a free parameter, radii ratio of the two stars
as a function of the orbital phase. Individual RVs are
computed by matching the components’ LSD proﬁles
to the respective initial guess synthetic spectrum-based
LSD proﬁles with the employment of the golden search
algorithm (Kiefer 1953). Therefore, RVs delivered by the
LSDBinary algorithm are on the scale relative to the ini-
tial guess LSD proﬁles. An example of the Level-0 out-
put in terms of the individual LSD proﬁles and the LSD-
based composite model spectrum overlaid on the input
observed spectrum of the binary system is shown in Fig-
ure 1 (bottom right panel)

3.2. Step-by-step algorithm demonstration

In order to provide a step-by-step demonstration of the LSD-
Binary algorithm performance, we simulate the in-eclipse spec-
tra of an Algol-like binary system with mid A-type primary and
K-giant secondary components. Time-series of orbital phase re-
solved input spectra are simulated with our RME module for a
representative S/N of ∼100. In this ideal scenario, line masks are
taken to fully correspond to the atmospheric parameters of the
primary and secondary components. The initial guess, synthetic
spectrum-based LSD proﬁles as well as the functional form of
the wavelength-dependent ﬂux ratio are computed with the LS-
DInit module under the following assumptions: (i) LSD proﬁles
of both stars are symmetric and their ﬂux ratio is constant with
orbital phase, and (ii) LSD proﬁle of the primary component is
distorted due to the RM eﬀect and the components’ ﬂux ratio is
orbital phase-dependent. In this particular example, as well as in
the rest of this work, LSD proﬁles are computed from a 500 Å
wide wavelength interval centred at 5250 Å. This wavelength in-
terval is free of the Balmer lines and contains a large amount of
metal lines in the spectra of A, F-type stars that we are concerned
with in this work.

Left panel in Figure 2 shows a singleshot system’s LSD pro-
ﬁle (black solid line) computed with the LSDBinary module at
orbital phase φ = 0.03 (φ = 0.0 corresponds to the centre of
the primary eclipse). The initial guess, synthetic spectrum-based
symmetric (computed with the SynthV and Convolve suite of

Article number, page 5 of 17

A&A proofs: manuscript no. LSD_paper

Fig. 1: The LSDBinary algorithm ﬂow chart. Bottom left panels show output of the LSDinit program in terms of the LSD proﬁles
computed from synthetic spectra (left) and continuum ﬂux ratio of the two binary components as a function of the wavelength
(right). The output of the LSDBinary program is illustrated in the two bottom right panels showing LSD proﬁles of the individual
binary components (left) and a comparison between the composite observed (black) and LSD-based model (red) spectra of the
binary. See Section 3 for details.

codes) and distorted by the RM eﬀect (computed with the RME
module) LSD proﬁles are shown with the black dots and red
stars, respectively. We stress that irrespective of the shape of the
initial guess LSD proﬁle, the output “observed” LSD proﬁle is
highly asymmetric and has the shape that is remarkably simi-
lar in both cases. In other words, the Level-0 data products of
the LSDBinary algorithm in the form of the system’s LSD pro-
ﬁle and the corresponding LSD-based model spectrum are barely
sensitive to the assumed initial guess. Radial velocities computed
from this singleshot system’s LSD proﬁle and measured rela-
tive to the respective initial guess synthetic spectrum-based LSD
proﬁles (that are computed at laboratory wavelengths) are indi-
cated with arrows in the middle panel in Figure 2 (designated
as “RV_noRME” and “RV_RME” for the case of the symmet-
ric and distorted initial guess proﬁle, respectively). The middle
panel also demonstrates the orbital phase-resolved RV curves for
clarity of comparison between the two initial guess cases. We
note that the two RV curves diﬀer from each other substantially
with one of them resembling pure orbital motion of the primary
component (red symbols) whereas the other one also showing
signatures of the line proﬁle distortions due to the RM eﬀect
(black symbols). Because RV is an integral quantity of the line
proﬁle it is sensitive to both global shift of the proﬁle due to the
orbital motion of the star and the proﬁle distortion, no matter

what the true cause of that distortion is. In our example (see left
panel in Figure 2), RV of the “observed” LSD proﬁle has positive
diﬀerence of some 15 km s−1 with respect to the symmetric ini-
tial guess LSD proﬁle. On the other hand, the same “observed”
LSD proﬁle has negative RV diﬀerence of some 10 km s−1 with
respect to the asymmetric initial guess LSD proﬁle that shares
laboratory wavelengths with its symmetric version but now con-
tains distortions due to the RM eﬀect.

The eﬀect of the initial guess LSD proﬁle and the corre-
sponding orbital phase-resolved functional form of the compo-
nents’ ﬂux ratio on the inferred with LSDBinary radii ratio pa-
rameter is illustrated in the right panel in Figure 2. One can see
that in the case of a distorted due to the RM eﬀect initial guess
LSD proﬁle the radii ratio curve appears nearly ﬂat (red stars).
This result is indicative of LSDBinary ﬁnding a constant with
orbital phase value of the radii ratio that, in this particular case,
also converges to the assumed in the simulations input value of
R2/R1 = 1.2. This is because ﬂux contribution of the primary
component varies in the course of its eclipse and this variability
is taken into account in the calculation of the initial guesses with
the RME module. The primary’s spectrum is therefore modelled
correctly in the LSDBinary module. On the other hand, the as-
sumption of a constant initial guess LSD proﬁle and ﬂux con-
tribution of the primary component in the course of its eclipse

Article number, page 6 of 17

LSDsynth LSD proﬁles from synthetic spectraSynthV Radiative transfer (Speciﬁc intensities at different 𝛍 = cos 𝚹 limb positions)Convolve Convolution & disk integration (Disk integration; vsini, resolving power, macroturbulence convolution)The LSDInit module  (preparation stage)LSDBinary Individual components LSD proﬁles, RVs, radii ratioThe LSDBinary module (core computations)OutputIndividual LSD proﬁlesIndividual & composite reconstructed spectra Individual radial velocity and radii ratio estimatesRME (optional) RME effect & disk integrationThe LSDBinary PackageA. Tkachenko et al.: Pushing Least-Squares Deconvolution to the next level: application to binary stars

Fig. 2: Graphical presentation of the LSDBinary algorithm. Left: initial guess synthetic LSD proﬁles computed with the LSDinit
module with (red stars) and without (black dots) the RM eﬀect, along with the resulting “observed” LSD proﬁle (black solid line)
computed with the LSDBinary module. Middle: the in-eclipse phase resolved RV-curves with (red stars) and without (black dots)
the RM eﬀect. The RVs measured relative to the respective initial guess LSD proﬁles are indicated with the arrows. Right: radii
ratio as a function of orbital phase with (red stars) and without (black dots) the RM eﬀect taken into account in the computation of
the initial guess synthetic spectrum-based LSD proﬁles. Arrows indicate the same data points as in the middle panel. See text for
details.

leads to appreciable variations of the inferred with LSDBinary
radii ratio parameter (black dots). This result is indicative of in-
correctly assumed orbital phase-independent ﬂux contribution of
the primary component. By assuming no ﬂux variation for the
primary component in the course of its obscuration by the sec-
ondary, we overestimate the primary’s contribution to the com-
posite spectrum of the binary system. The amount of this over-
estimation is variable and depends strongly on the surface area
of the primary that is being blocked by the companion star. In
practical terms, the assumption of a constant with orbital phase
ﬂux ratio leads to a signiﬁcant overestimation of line depths for
the primary and causes an appreciable mismatch between the
observed and LSD-based model composite spectra of the binary
system. In an attempt to compensate for this mismatch, the LSD-
Binary module seeks to lower contribution of the primary com-
ponent to the total ﬂux of the system, the goal that is most ef-
ﬁciently achieved by increasing the radii ratio parameter R2/R1.
The eﬀect is expected to be more pronounced at phases where
larger surface area of the primary is being blocked by the com-
panion star, i.e. in the centre of the primary eclipse (just as we
observe in the right panel in Figure 2).

In conclusion, though the Level-0 data products of the LSD-
Binary algorithm (LSD proﬁles and LSD-based model spectra)
are barely sensitive to the choice of the initial guess LSD proﬁles
and constant versus variable ﬂux ratio, its Level-1 data products
(RVs and the radii ratio parameter) are inﬂuenced signiﬁcantly
by the choice made. In the next Section, we demonstrate how the
sensitivity of the Level-1 data products to the choice of the ini-
tial guess can be exploited to improve upon the assumed orbital
parameters of a binary system.

4. LSDBinary: method validation, applicability

range, and limitations

In this Section, we present a few key tests based on simulated
time-series of spectra, that are necessary to get a grasp on ap-
plicability range of the LSDBinary algorithm. In these simula-
tions, we consider two artiﬁcial binary systems representative
of two particular classes of binary stars. Namely, detached sys-
tems with similar stellar components and semi-detached Algol-
type systems with one component being signiﬁcantly cooler and
more evolved than the other. RZ Cas (e.g., Soydugan et al. 2006;

Table 1: Summary of systemic and atmospheric parameters of
the RZ Cas and KIC 11285625 binary systems as derived in
Tkachenko et al. (2013) and Debosscher et al. (2013), respec-
tively

Parameter

RZ Cas

KIC 11285625

Primary Secondary Primary Secondary

0.0

8 800
4.3
65

Teﬀ (K)
log g (dex)
v sin i (km s−1)
[M/H] (dex)
K∗ (km s−1)
P (days)
i∗∗ (degrees)
e
R2/R1
∗ Radial velocity semi-amplitude
∗∗ Orbital inclination angle

1.195
82
0.0
1.19

71.5

4 800
3.5
80

7 000
4.0
14

7 200
4.2
8

202

135

174

0.0

10.79
85
0.005
0.69

Tkachenko et al. 2009) and KIC 11285625 (Debosscher et al.
2013) are used as reference systems in our calculations, their
relevant systemic and atmospheric parameters are summarised
in Table 1. The RME module is used to synthesise composite
spectra of both binary systems with a particular focus on the in-
eclipse phases. These orbital phases are by far the most chal-
lenging because: (i) spectral line contributions of the two binary
components overlap in the velocity space, and (ii) line proﬁles
of the primary component are largely distorted due to the RM
eﬀect, and (iii) ﬂux contribution of the primary component is
orbital phase-dependent.

4.1. Effects of the signal-to-noise ratio and resolving power

In the ﬁrst instance, we test the LSDBinary method as to its abil-
ity to handle spectra of variable S/N and resolving power R. To
that end, we add Poisson noise to our synthesised time-series
to simulate spectra of S/N = 40, 80, and 120, for which we also
consider three regimes of the resolving power: low, medium, and
high at R = 5 000, 25 000, and 60 000, respectively. Figures 3
and 4 summarise the results obtained for both binary systems.

Article number, page 7 of 17

A&A proofs: manuscript no. LSD_paper

Fig. 3: Results of the application of the LSDBinary algorithm to artiﬁcial in-eclipse spectra of the RZ Cas binary system. Top block:
LSD proﬁles of the primary (red) and secondary (black) components. Bottom block: LSD-based model spectra (red) overlaid on
the input “observed” spectra (black) of the system. In each of the blocks, rows correspond to diﬀerent values of the resolving power
(from top to bottom, R=60 000, 25 000, and 5 000) while columns reﬂect the change in S/N of the spectrum (from left to right,
S/N=120, 80, and 40).

One can see that the common feature to both systems is the
ability of the LSDBinary algorithm to handle spectra in the en-
tire range of S/N values: the obtained LSD proﬁles as well as
LSD-based model spectra both have S/N that is (as expected)
substantially higher than in the input spectra while the line pro-
ﬁle shapes do not display any signiﬁcant dependency on the

S/N value. This is not an unexpected result given that the LSD
technique is by design most eﬃcient for stars that display large
number of lines in their spectra, and both our simulated binary
systems with their A- and F-type primary components meet the
above requirement. Furthermore, we do not observe any signif-
icant changes in the obtained Level-0 data products when de-

Article number, page 8 of 17

A. Tkachenko et al.: Pushing Least-Squares Deconvolution to the next level: application to binary stars

Fig. 4: Same as Figure 3 but for the KIC 11285625 system.

grading resolving power from high (R = 60 000) to medium (R
= 25 000) for the case of the RZ Cas system. However, we lose
the ability to resolve the primary component’s spectral line dis-
tortions due to the RM eﬀect when degrading spectral resolution
further to its lowest value of R = 5 000. Comparing the cases of
RZ Cas and KIC 11285625 with each other, we ﬁnd that the ef-
fect of spectral resolution is much more important in the latter
case: local distortions of the LSD proﬁle of the primary com-
ponent in the KIC 11285625 system get smeared out at medium
resolving power of R = 25 000 already. This is likely explained
by the much smaller value of the projected rotational velocity

of the star than in the case of the primary component of RZ Cas
and, to a lesser extent, by relative contributions of the two stellar
components of KIC 11285625 to its composite spectrum. Over-
all, orbital and stellar conﬁguration of the KIC 11285625 system
suggests much lower amplitude of the RM eﬀect than in the case
of RZ Cas, which in turn requires higher spectral resolution to
resolve the eﬀect.

Article number, page 9 of 17

A&A proofs: manuscript no. LSD_paper

Fig. 5: Eﬀect of changing atmospheric parameters of the primary component of the RZ Cas system on the LSD proﬁles of the
primary (left) and secondary (right). From top to bottom: Teﬀ, log g, and [M/H] are varied between 8 400 and 9 200 K (step width
of 100 K), 3.9 and 4.7 dex (step width of 0.1 dex), and -0.3 and 0.3 dex (step width of 0.1 dex), respectively. The LSD proﬁles
shown in red correspond to the true parameters of the star listed in Table 1.

Article number, page 10 of 17

4.2. Effect of variable input atmospheric parameters
In the next test, we investigate the eﬀect of changing atmo-
spheric parameters of either binary component on the Level-0

A. Tkachenko et al.: Pushing Least-Squares Deconvolution to the next level: application to binary stars

Fig. 6: Same as Figure 5 but for the eﬀect of changing atmospheric parameters of the secondary component of the RZ Cas system.
From top to bottom: Teﬀ, log g, and [M/H] are varied between 4 500 and 5 100 K (step width of 100 K), 3.1 and 3.9 dex (step
width of 0.1 dex), and -0.3 and 0.3 dex (step width of 0.1 dex), respectively. The LSD proﬁles shown in red correspond to the true
parameters of the star listed in Table 1.

data products of the LSDBinary algorithm. The eﬀect of vari-
able/uncertain atmospheric parameters is expected to propagate

into the LSD proﬁles through changing properties of the input
line mask as well as through the associated change in the com-

Article number, page 11 of 17

A&A proofs: manuscript no. LSD_paper

Fig. 7: The eﬀect of variable initial guess radii ratio R2/R1 (top row) and orbital inclination angle i (bottom row) parameters on the
obtained with the LSDBinary algorithm orbital phase-resolved radii ratio (left column) and radial velocity (right column) curves.
Filled squares and triangles in the top left panel refer to the initial guess R2/R1 = 1.1 and 1.4, respectively. The same symbols in
the bottom left panel refer to the initial guess inclination angle i values of 74◦ and 88◦, respectively. Red stars indicate a solution
corresponding to the parameter values of R2/R1=1.2 and i=82◦ - a combination that represents the closest match to the true parameter
values listed in Table 1. See text for details.

ponents’ ﬂux ratio. Since the eﬀect is qualitatively similar for
both simulated binary systems, here we present the results ob-
tained for the RZ Cas system only. We also present results for a
single combination of R = 60 000 and S/N = 120 since the ef-
fect of changing these characteristics has been discussed in the
previous section.

Figures 5 and 6 illustrate the eﬀect of changing atmospheric
parameters of the primary and secondary components, respec-
tively, on the obtained LSD proﬁles. Eﬀective temperature Teﬀ,
surface gravity log g, and metallicity [M/H] are varied symmet-
rically with respect to their true values (see Table 1) and within
typical spectroscopic uncertainties: ∼5% in Teﬀ and 0.3-0.4 dex
in log g and [M/H]. The LSD proﬁle of the primary changes most
notably when varying the component’s Teﬀ and [M/H] (top and
bottom left panels in Figure 5) while it appears to be barely sen-
sitive to the variations of log g (middle left panel in Figure 5).
Lack of sensitivity to the latter parameter is likely explained by

limited eﬀect of the surface gravity of the star on the overall
shape and, to a lesser extent, strength of metal lines in the Teﬀ
regime of A- and F-type stars. At the same time, changing pa-
rameters of the primary component have little to no eﬀect on the
LSD proﬁle of the secondary star (right column in Figure 5).

Similarly, varying parameters of the secondary star has little
to no eﬀect on the LSD proﬁle of the primary (left column in
Figure 6). At the same time, the LSD proﬁles of the secondary
component appear to be most sensitive to changes in Teﬀ (top
right panel in Figure 6) and log g (middle right panel in Figure 6)
of the star, and less so to its metallicity [M/H] (bottom right panel
in Figure 6). We note that the secondary component in an Algol-
type system is a more evolved and about twice as cool as the
primary which explains a more appreciable sensitivity of its LSD
proﬁle to the log g parameter.

Ultimately, we stress that no signiﬁcant changes in the over-
all shape of the LSD proﬁle are observed for either of the bi-

Article number, page 12 of 17

A. Tkachenko et al.: Pushing Least-Squares Deconvolution to the next level: application to binary stars

nary components when their atmospheric parameters are varied
within typical spectroscopic uncertainties. Instead, Figures 5 and
6 reveal an appreciable eﬀect on the global scaling of the compo-
nent’s LSD proﬁle in terms of its depth/strength. These ﬁndings
are in line with the results by Tkachenko et al. (2013) who also
demonstrate that ability of the LSD technique to reproduce an
overall shape of the line proﬁle is independent of the assumption
of atmospheric parameters for the line mask calculation, pro-
vided they do not deviate from their true values by more than
typical spectroscopic uncertainties.

4.3. The effect of variable atmospheric parameters, radii ratio

and orbital inclination

In Section 3.1, we brieﬂy touched upon how the LSDBinary al-
gorithm can be used in conjunction with the assumption of a
symmetric initial guess LSD proﬁle to measure the in-eclipse RV
variations associated with both the orbital motion of the star and
the geometric Rossiter-McLaughlin eﬀect. Such RV-curves can
be used for follow-up studies, e.g. to assess the degree of spin-
orbit misalignment, if present in the system. At the same time,
we showed that the assumption of orbital phase-independent ﬂux
ratio of the two stars (that comes along with the assumption of
a symmetric initial guess LSD proﬁle) results in an appreciably
variable with orbital phase radii ratio R2/R1 delivered by LSDBi-
nary. Obviously, true radii of the stars (and hence their ratio) do
not change in the course of the eclipse and the observed variation
of R2/R1 is a pure eﬀect of ignoring orbital phase dependency
of the ﬂux ratio in the initial guess calculations. In essence, the
R2/R1 parameter is being exploited in this case as a global scal-
ing factor for the light contribution of the primary component
that varies in the course of its eclipse.

In this section, we investigate the eﬀect of variable (at the
step of the initial guess calculation in the LSDInit module) stel-
lar radii ratio and orbital inclination angle on the data products
of the LSDBinary algorithm. Similar to Section 4.2, we focus
on the case of an artiﬁcial Algol-type system resembling stellar
and orbital properties of the RZ Cas binary system (see Table 1),
where the artiﬁcial “observed” spectra are characterised by R =
60 000 and S/N = 120. To account for the Rossiter-McLaughlin
eﬀect in the test, the initial guess orbital phase-resolved LSD
proﬁles and wavelength-dependent functional form of the com-
ponents’ ﬂux ratio are computed with the RME module.

In the current test, the radii ratio R2/R1 and orbital inclina-
tion angle i parameters are varied one at the time while keeping
the other one ﬁxed. This way, the two scenarios considered are:
(i) the R2/R1 parameter is varied in the range from 0.8 to 1.6
(step width of 0.05) while keeping i = 82◦, and (ii) the i parame-
ter is varied in the range from 70◦ to 90◦ (step width of 2◦) while
keeping R2/R1 = 1.19. In total, we consider 28 R2/R1-i param-
eter combinations (17 and 11 in the cases (i) and (ii), respec-
tively) when computing the initial guess LSD proﬁles and com-
ponents’ ﬂux ratio with the LSDInit module. The initial guess is
then passed on to the LSDBinary algorithm that takes the above-
described artiﬁcial “observed” spectra as input and returns opti-
mised LSD proﬁles of both binary components and their radii
ratio parameter R2/R1.

The top row in Figure 7 summarises the results obtained for
the case (i) where the initial guess radii ratio parameter R2/R1
is varied while keeping the inclination angle i ﬁxed. The left
and right panels demonstrate the orbital phase-resolved R2/R1
and RV curves, respectively, where the parameter combination
that represents the closest match to the true parameter values is
shown with red stars. One can see that this particular solution

favours a constant with the orbital phase value of the radii ra-
tio and the RV-curve that closely resembles pure orbital motion
of the primary component. At the same time, setting the initial
guess R2/R1 to a larger or smaller parameter value (e.g., 1.4 and
1.1 as indicated with the ﬁlled triangles and squares in the top
left panel in Figure 7) results in the R2/R1 versus orbital phase
curve that deviates appreciably from the constant value of the re-
spective parameter. The same conclusion holds true for the RV-
curve where one starts to see residual signal from the Rossiter-
McLaughlin eﬀect which increases progressively as the devia-
tions of the initial guess R2/R1 parameter get larger from its true
value. The former is the direct consequence of incorrectly as-
sumed initial guess component’s ﬂux ratio due to variable R2/R1
and ﬁxed eﬀective temperatures, while the latter is explained by
the variations in the obtained with LSDBinary LSD proﬁles as-
sociated with the changing Rossiter-McLaughlin eﬀect geometry
due to variations in R2/R1.

Similar eﬀect is observed when the initial guess orbital in-
clination angle parameter i is varied while keeping R2/R1 ﬁxed
(see the bottom row in Figure 7). Changing the orbital inclina-
tion angle i to a larger or smaller value (e.g., 88◦ and 74◦ as
indicated in the bottom left panel with the ﬁlled triangles and
squares, respectively) leads to a smaller or larger area of the pri-
mary component being visible during its eclipse phases. This in
turn leads to a larger or smaller ﬂux contribution from the pri-
mary star in the initial guess, the eﬀect that is compensated by
a larger or smaller value of the R2/R1 parameter as optimised in
the LSDBinary module. As can be seen in Figure 7 (bottom left
panel), the eﬀect is progressive with orbital phase and reaches
its point of extremum at the centre of the primary eclipse. Just
as is the case with the variable initial guess R2/R1 parameter, the
orbital inclination angle i has strong eﬀect on the shape of the
initial guess LSD proﬁle which leads to the presence of resid-
ual Rossiter-McLaughlin eﬀect signal in the RV curve when the
value of i is not optimal (see bottom right panel in Figure 7).

In the last set of tests on artiﬁcial data, we investigate how
the in-eclipse orbital-phase resolved RV curve of the eclipsed
primary component is aﬀected by uncertainty in the determina-
tion of its Teﬀ and component’s radii ratio R2/R1. To start with,
we assume the R2/R1 parameter is known by other means, e.g.
from a light curve solution of the system. In this particular sce-
nario, we ﬁx R2/R1 to its true value of 1.19 (see Table 1, col-
umn “RZ Cas”) and investigate how well we can recover the
orbital inclination angle i of the system when Teﬀ of the primary
is varied within its typical spectroscopic uncertainties of 3-5%,
or ∼300 K in the absolute value for the system considered here.
Because the Rossiter-McLaughlin eﬀect is accounted for in the
calculation of the initial guess LSD proﬁles and components’
ﬂux ratio, the optimal value of the inclination angle is the one
that provides minimal deviation of the RV curve obtained with
the LSDBinary algorithm from the component’s RV curve that
resembles its pure orbital motion. The top row in Figure 8 sum-
marises the obtained results by considering two extreme values
of the eﬀective temperature of the primary component: 8 500 K
(left panel) and 9 100 K (right panel). The results are illustrated
for three values of the orbital inclination angle i: two extreme
cases of 74◦ and 90◦, and the optimum value of 82◦ we arrived
at. We do not employ any minimisation algorithm to search for
an optimum value of the inclination angle, instead perform a grid
search in the range i∈[74◦,90◦] with the step width of 1◦. One can
see that true value of the inclination angle i = 82◦ is recovered
well in both cases considered in this test whereas other solutions
are characterised by non-negligible deviations of individual RV
measurements from those expected for pure orbital motion of

Article number, page 13 of 17

A&A proofs: manuscript no. LSD_paper

Fig. 8: Top row: the eﬀect of incorrectly assumed initial guess Teﬀ of the primary component with R2/R1 being ﬁxed to its true value
of 1.19 (see Table 1). Left and right panel shows the eﬀect of under- and over-estimated eﬀective temperature value, i.e. Teﬀ=8 500 K
and 9 100 K, respectively. Red stars show the optimal solution obtained with LSDBinary corresponding to the orbital inclination
angle i = 82◦. Two more solutions corresponding to i = 74◦ (open circles) and 90◦ (open squares) are shown for comparison.
Bottom row: the combined eﬀect of incorrectly assumed initial guess Teﬀ of the primary and components’ radii ratio R2/R1. Left
and right panel shows the case of under- and over-estimated parameters: Teﬀ= 8 500 K and R2/R1 = 1.02, and Teﬀ= 9 100 K and
R2/R1 = 1.36, respectively. See text for details.

the star. These results reinforce our conclusions made earlier in
Section 4.2 that any variations of atmospheric parameters that
are within their typical spectroscopic uncertainties do not have
signiﬁcant eﬀect on the shape of the obtained LSD proﬁles and
hence RVs inferred from them.

Similarly, we now consider a case where the R2/R1 parame-
ter is estimated with the LSDBinary algorithm from the out-of-
eclipse spectra instead of it being ﬁxed to a priori known value.
Considering the same two extreme values of Teﬀ of the primary,
i.e. 8 500 K and 9 100 K, we compute initial guess LSD pro-
ﬁles and component’s ﬂux ratio for the out-of-eclipse phases
employing the SynthV and Convolve suite of codes. There-
fore, we assume symmetric LSD proﬁles for both binary com-
ponents and a constant ﬂux ratio, a well-justiﬁed assumption for
the out-of-eclipse phases. We then let LSDBinary to optimise
for the R2/R1 parameter by minimising the diﬀerence between
the “observed” and LSD-based model composite spectra. We

ﬁnd R2/R1 = 1.02 and 1.36 to provide the best match between
the model and “observations” when Teﬀ of the primary is set to
8 500 K and 9 1000 K, respectively. The diﬀerence of some 15%
between the best ﬁt R2/R1 and its true value is the direct conse-
quence of incorrectly assumed Teﬀ of the primary component. A
lower (higher) initial guess value of the primary’s eﬀective tem-
perature leads to over (under) estimation of its ﬂux contribution
to the total light of the system. The inconsistency arising be-
tween the model and “observations” is eﬃciently remediable by
varying the R2/R1 parameter that, along with the eﬀective tem-
peratures, controls individual ﬂux contributions of both binary
components. Therefore, a lower (higher) initial guess Teﬀ of the
primary component is compensated by its larger (smaller) radius
and leads to a decrease (increase) of the R2/R1 parameter.

With the R2/R1 parameter being estimated from the out-of-
eclipse-spectra, we now proceed with modelling of the in-eclipse
spectra. The initial guess LSD proﬁles and component’s ﬂux ra-

Article number, page 14 of 17

A. Tkachenko et al.: Pushing Least-Squares Deconvolution to the next level: application to binary stars

the binary components are heavily blended. To that end, we de-
velop a dedicated RME code that allows one to compute initial
guess LSD proﬁles and components’ ﬂux ratio in the presence
of the Rossiter-McLaughlin eﬀect. At the same time, we include
an option of initial guess symmetric LSD proﬁles and a constant
with orbital phase components’ ﬂux ratio to provide the means
of working with the out-of-eclipse phases too. This latter option
can also be applied to the in-eclipse orbital phases in which case
a RV curve distorted due to the Rossiter-McLaughlin eﬀect can
be measured directly from the observations.

The LSDBinary software package developed in this work
is freely available on GitHub1 and comprises: (i) the SynthV
and Convolve suite of codes to compute line masks and initial
guess symmetric LSD proﬁles; (ii) the RME code to account for
the Rossiter-McLaughlin eﬀect in the calculation of the orbital
phase-dependent initial guess LSD proﬁles and binary compo-
nents’ ﬂux ratio; (iii) the LSDInit module that serves as a wrap-
per around the above-mentioned codes and whose main purpose
is to organise input required for the core calculations; and (iv)
the LSDBinary module that performs core calculations and, in
its most basic conﬁguration, delivers LSD proﬁles, LSD-based
model spectra, and RVs of both binary components.

In this work, we also provide an extensive test of the LSDBi-
nary algorithm based on artiﬁcial spectra of two binary systems:
an Algol-like system with a main-sequence A-type primary and
evolved K-type giant secondary components, and a detached bi-
nary with two F-type components. The main results and conclu-
sions of our study can be summarised as follows:

– the algorithm has low sensitivity to signal-to-noise ratio of
the input observed spectra provided a suﬃcient number of
atomic lines are present in the stellar spectrum. In practice,
this makes the LSDBinary algorithm most suitable for stars
of spectral type A and later. The regime of coolest stars
whose spectra are dominated by molecular lines should be
avoided as well for the reasons of the current lack of the al-
gorithm validation in the respective parameter space;

– because resolving details of the line proﬁle variations is
an important aspect in the study of the in-eclipse spec-
tra and Rossiter-McLaughlin eﬀect, resolving power of the
instrument should be suﬃciently high for the purpose. In
this study, we investigate the regimes of low (R = 5 000),
medium (R = 25 000), and high (R = 65 000) resolution and
ﬁnd that the former of the three is largely insuﬃcient irre-
spective of conﬁguration of the binary system and amplitude
of the Rossiter-McLaughlin eﬀect. Depending on how large
the latter is, a medium resolving power of the instrument of
R ≈ 25 000 might suﬃce, though we recommend to push
for a higher resolution R so that all details of the line proﬁle
variations can be resolved;

– the shapes of the obtained LSD proﬁles of both binary com-
ponents are found by us to be largely insensitive to the varia-
tions in their atmospheric parameters Teﬀ, log g, and [M/H],
provided these variations are within typical spectroscopic
uncertainties. The largest eﬀect is observed on the global
scaling of the LSD proﬁles which leaves the RVs inferred
from them unaﬀected. On the other hand, variations in Teﬀ
are found to have large eﬀect on the components’ radii ratio
inferred with the LSDBinary algorithm. This result is largely
intuitive given that an incorrect assumption about Teﬀ of the
star leads to over- or under-estimation of its ﬂux contribu-
tion to the total light of the system, the eﬀect that is eﬃ-
ciently compensated in the LSDBinary algorithm by varia-

1https://github.com/AndrewStSp/LSDBinary

Article number, page 15 of 17

Fig. 9: An example of ﬁne-tuning the inclination angle parameter
i by minimising deviations of the R2/R1 (bottom) and RV (top)
measurements obtained with the LSDBinary algorithm from
their respective constant value and pure orbital motion-driven
curve. The open circles, red stars, and open squares show the re-
sults obtained for the orbital inclination angle i = 76◦, 82◦, and
88◦, respectively. The black solid line shows the orbital motion-
driven RV curve of the primary and the constant systemic value
of R2/R1 = 1.19 in the top and bottom panel, respectively.

tio are computed with the RME module for incorrectly assumed
values of R2/R1 and Teﬀ of the primary: (i) Teﬀ= 8 500 K, R2/R1
= 1.02, and (ii) Teﬀ= 9 100 K, R2/R1 = 1.36. The bottom row in
Figure 8 shows the results obtained for the above cases (i) (left
panel) and (ii) (right panel) and for three diﬀerent values of the
inclination angle i, 74◦ (open circles), 82◦ (red stars), and 90◦
(open squares). Although the RV curve corresponding to i = 82◦
still provides the smallest deviations from the RV curve resem-
bling pure orbital motion of the primary component compared to
all other values of i considered in this test, the residual distortions
due to the Rossiter-McLaughlin eﬀect are signiﬁcant. In our pre-
vious test with variable initial guess Teﬀ of the primary compo-
nent (see above and top row in Figure 8) we demonstrated that
the eﬀect of this parameter on the in-eclipse RV curve is minimal
subject to the correct assumption of the orbital inclination angle.
Therefore, we conclude that the R2/R1 parameter has a signiﬁ-
cantly larger eﬀect on Level-0 and Level-1 data products of the
LSDBinary algorithm than eﬀective temperature of the star, de-
spite both of these parameters being important for a correct pre-
diction of the binary component’s ﬂux ratio. This conclusion is
also largely intuitive: whereas Teﬀ of the primary impacts signif-
icantly its ﬂux contribution to the total light of the system, the
R2/R1 parameter also has a large eﬀect on the geometry of the
Rossiter-McLaughlin eﬀect.

5. Discussion and Conclusions

In this study, we presented a generalisation of the Least-Squares
Deconvolution technique to eclipsing, spectroscopic double-
lined binary systems. The main focus is put on separation of
spectral contributions of individual binary components in the ve-
locity space so that their RVs can be measured from the obtained
LSD proﬁles with high precision. In our tests, we put large em-
phasis on the in-eclipse phases where spectral contributions of

A&A proofs: manuscript no. LSD_paper

tions of the stellar radius through the radii ratio parameter
R2/R1. We note, however, that LSD proﬁles, and hence RVs
inferred from them, are expected to be largely aﬀected by
non-uniform distributions of physical quantities (e.g. tem-
perature, velocity, and/or chemical elements) over the stel-
lar surface. The LSDBinary code presented in this work in-
cludes a multiproﬁle LSD capability that, with just a mild de-
velopment eﬀort, could be exploited for calculation of multi-
temperature and/or multi-chemical composition LSD pro-
ﬁles.2;

– the orbital inclination angle i and radii ratio R2/R1 are pre-
dictably the two parameters that have largest eﬀect on the
shape of the LSD proﬁles of the eclipsed binary compo-
nent, and hence the shape and amplitude of the Rossiter-
McLaughlin eﬀect. Assuming orbital conﬁguration of the
binary system and one of the above parameters are known
while the other one being optimised, the tandem of the RME
and LSDBinary modules reconstructs successfully the pure
orbital motion-driven RV curve of the eclipsed star. Should
this not be the case, it is an indication of either incorrectly
determined atmospheric parameters of either or both binary
components, or of deﬁciencies in stellar atmosphere models
that fail to predict correctly the components’ ﬂux ratio.

In practice, the latter ﬁnding can be exploited to either per-
form a consistency check between photometric and spectro-
scopic solutions of a binary system or to ﬁne-tune the orbital
inclination angle and/or components’ radii ratio parameters from
spectroscopic data. To demonstrate that, we return to the artiﬁ-
cial in-eclipse data of an RZ Cas-like binary system whose con-
ﬁguration and atmospheric parameters are assumed to be known,
except for the orbital inclination angle i that needs a ﬁne-tuning
(see Table 1 for the list of the assumed parameters). We employ
the tandem of the RME and LSDBinary codes to compute LSD
proﬁles and RVs of both binary components from time-series of
the simulated in-eclipse spectra, while keeping the radii ratio pa-
rameter R2/R1 free in the LSDBinary module. The results are
illustrated in the top and bottom panels in Figure 9 for RV and
R2/R1 as a function of orbital phase, respectively. Both curves
are shown for three values of the inclination angle i: 76◦ (open
circles), 82◦ (red stars), and 88◦ (open squares). One can see that
the best ﬁt solution is achieved at the true value of the orbital
inclination angle and corresponds to the RV curve resembling
pure orbital motion of the star and the constant value of the radii
ratio. This way, simultaneously minimising deviations of the in-
eclipse RV curve from its pure orbital motion version and of the
R2/R1 curve from constant value, allows one to ﬁne-tune (or per-
form spectroscopic consistency check for) one of the parameters
considered in this test.

We note that the LSDBinary software package has been
successfully applied to spectroscopic time-series of Algol-type
systems with pulsating primary components, R CMa (Lehmann
et al. 2018) and RZ Cas (Lehmann et al. 2020). In both of these
studies, the algorithm was used to compute the separated LSD
proﬁles of both binary components and to measure precise or-
bital phase-resolved RVs from them. The separated LSD proﬁles
of the primary component of the R CMa system were addition-
ally used to study line proﬁle variations caused by non-radial
pulsations of the star (Lehmann et al. 2018).

Acknowledgements. The research leading to these results has (partially) re-
ceived funding from the KU Leuven Research Council (grant C16/18/005: PAR-
ADISE) and from the BELgian federal Science Policy Oﬃce (BELSPO) through

2This particular capability is beyond the scope of this paper and is hence not
elaborated on any further.

Article number, page 16 of 17

PRODEX grant PLATO. Part of this work was supported by the German Deut-
sche Forschungsgemeinschaft, DFG project number Ts 17/2–1 and LE1102/3-1.

References

Addison, B. C., Wang, S., Johnson, M. C., et al. 2018, AJ, 156, 197 2
Aerts, C. 2021, Reviews of Modern Physics, 93, 015001 2
Aerts, C., Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., & Kurtz, D. W. 2010, Asteroseismology 1
Aerts, C., Mathis, S., & Rogers, T. M. 2019, ARA&A, 57, 35 2
Aerts, C., Van Reeth, T., & Tkachenko, A. 2017, ApJ, 847, L7 2
Albrecht, S., Winn, J. N., Fabrycky, D. C., Torres, G., & Setiawan, J. 2012, in
From Interacting Binaries to Exoplanets: Essential Modeling Tools, ed. M. T.
Richards & I. Hubeny, Vol. 282, 397–398 2

Alecian, E., Villebrun, F., Grunhut, J., et al. 2019, in EAS Publications Series,

Vol. 82, EAS Publications Series, 345–355 2

Asensio Ramos, A. & Petit, P. 2015, A&A, 583, A51 3
Auvergne, M., Bodin, P., Boisnard, L., et al. 2009, A&A, 506, 411 1
Banyard, G., Sana, H., Mahy, L., et al. 2022, A&A, 658, A69 2
Beck, P. G., Montalban, J., Kallinger, T., et al. 2012, Nature, 481, 55 2
Blazère, A., Neiner, C., & Petit, P. 2016a, MNRAS, 459, L81 3
Blazère, A., Petit, P., Lignières, F., et al. 2016b, A&A, 586, A97 3
Bodensteiner, J., Sana, H., Wang, C., et al. 2021, A&A, 652, A70 2
Borucki, W. J., Koch, D., Basri, G., et al. 2010, Science, 327, 977 1
Bowman, D. M., Johnston, C., Tkachenko, A., et al. 2019, ApJ, 883, L26 2
Bracewell, R. 1965, The Fourier Transform and its applications 2
Cantiello, M., Mankovich, C., Bildsten, L., Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., & Paxton,

B. 2014, ApJ, 788, 93 2

Claret, A. & Torres, G. 2016, A&A, 592, A15 2
Claret, A. & Torres, G. 2017, ApJ, 849, 18 2
Claret, A. & Torres, G. 2018, ApJ, 859, 100 2
Claret, A. & Torres, G. 2019, ApJ, 876, 134 2
Cohen, R. E., Geller, A. M., & von Hippel, T. 2020a, AJ, 159, 11 2
Cohen, R. E., Geller, A. M., & von Hippel, T. 2020b, AJ, 159, 11 2
Conroy, K., Horvat, M., Pablo, H., et al. 2019, in American Astronomical So-
ciety Meeting Abstracts, Vol. 233, American Astronomical Society Meeting
Abstracts #233, 348.27 2

Conroy, K., Jones, D., Horvat, M., et al. 2020, in American Astronomical So-
ciety Meeting Abstracts, Vol. 235, American Astronomical Society Meeting
Abstracts #235, 114.05 2

Conroy, K. E., Kochoska, A., Hey, D., et al. 2021, in American Astronomical
Society Meeting Abstracts, Vol. 53, American Astronomical Society Meeting
Abstracts, 140.03 2

Conroy, K. E., Prša, A., Stassun, K. G., et al. 2014, AJ, 147, 45 2
Debosscher, J., Aerts, C., Tkachenko, A., et al. 2013, A&A, 556, A56 2, 7
Degroote, P., Conroy, K., Hambleton, K., et al. 2013, in EAS Publications Se-
ries, Vol. 64, EAS Publications Series, ed. K. Pavlovski, A. Tkachenko, &
G. Torres, 277–284 2

Donati, J. F., Semel, M., Carter, B. D., Rees, D. E., & Collier Cameron, A. 1997,

MNRAS, 291, 658 2, 3

Fuller, J. 2017, MNRAS, 472, 1538 2
Fuller, J. 2021, MNRAS, 501, 483 2
Fuller, J., Cantiello, M., Lecoanet, D., & Quataert, E. 2015a, ApJ, 810, 101 2
Fuller, J., Cantiello, M., Stello, D., Garcia, R. A., & Bildsten, L. 2015b, Science,

350, 423 2

Fuller, J., Derekas, A., Borkovits, T., et al. 2013, MNRAS, 429, 2425 2
Fuller, J., Kurtz, D. W., Handler, G., & Rappaport, S. 2020, MNRAS, 498, 5730

2

Fuller, J. & Lai, D. 2012, MNRAS, 420, 3126 2
Fuller, J., Piro, A. L., & Jermyn, A. S. 2019, MNRAS, 485, 3661 2
Gallenne, A., Pietrzy´nski, G., Graczyk, D., et al. 2019, A&A, 632, A31 2
Gray, D. F. 1992, The observation and analysis of stellar photospheres., Vol. 20

4

Guinan, E. F., Ribas, I., Fitzpatrick, E. L., et al. 2000, ApJ, 544, 409 2
Handler, G., Kurtz, D. W., Rappaport, S. A., et al. 2020, Nature Astronomy, 4,

684 2

Howell, S. B., Sobeck, C., Haas, M., et al. 2014, PASP, 126, 398 1
IJspeert, L. W., Tkachenko, A., Johnston, C., et al. 2021, A&A, 652, A120 2
Johnston, C. 2021, A&A, 655, A29 2
Johnston, C., Tkachenko, A., Aerts, C., et al. 2019, MNRAS, 482, 1231 2
Kamiaka, S., Benomar, O., Suto, Y., et al. 2019, AJ, 157, 137 2
Kawaler, S. D. 2015, in Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc Conference Series,
Vol. 493, 19th European Workshop on White Dwarfs, ed. P. Dufour, P. Berg-
eron, & G. Fontaine, 65 2

Kiefer, J. 1953, Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society, 4, 502 5
Kirk, B., Conroy, K., Prša, A., et al. 2016, AJ, 151, 68 2
Kochukhov, O., Makaganiuk, V., & Piskunov, N. 2010, A&A, 524, A5 3
Kochukhov, O., Shultz, M., & Neiner, C. 2019, A&A, 621, A47 3

A. Tkachenko et al.: Pushing Least-Squares Deconvolution to the next level: application to binary stars

Lehmann, H., Dervi¸so˘glu, A., Mkrtichian, D. E., et al. 2020, A&A, 644, A121

16

Lehmann, H., Tsymbal, V., Pertermann, F., et al. 2018, A&A, 615, A131 16
MacDonald, J. & Mullan, D. J. 2017, ApJ, 850, 58 2
Marquardt, D. W. 1963, SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics, 11, 431 4
Martinet, S., Meynet, G., Ekström, S., et al. 2021, A&A, 648, A126 2
Mathys, G. 2017, A&A, 601, A14 2
Matijeviˇc, G., Prša, A., Orosz, J. A., et al. 2012, AJ, 143, 123 2
Maxted, P. F. L. 2016, A&A, 591, A111 2
Mazeh, T. & Zucker, S. 1994, Ap&SS, 212, 349 2
McLaughlin, D. B. 1924, ApJ, 60, 22 2, 4
Minnaert, M. 1935, ZAp, 10, 40 3
Mosser, B., Goupil, M. J., Belkacem, K., et al. 2012, A&A, 548, A10 2
Pavlovski, K., Hummel, C. A., Tkachenko, A., et al. 2022, A&A, 658, A92 2
Pavlovski, K., Southworth, J., Kolbas, V., & Smalley, B. 2014, MNRAS, 438,

590 2

Pavlovski, K., Southworth, J., & Tamajo, E. 2018, MNRAS, 481, 3129 2
Pavlovski, K., Tamajo, E., Koubský, P., et al. 2009, MNRAS, 400, 791 2
Piskunov, N. & Kochukhov, O. 2002, A&A, 381, 736 4, 5
Prša, A. 2018, Modeling and Analysis of Eclipsing Binary Stars; The theory and

design principles of PHOEBE 2

Prša, A., Degroote, P., Conroy, K., et al. 2013, in EAS Publications Series,
Vol. 64, EAS Publications Series, ed. K. Pavlovski, A. Tkachenko, & G. Tor-
res, 259–268 2

Prša, A. & Zwitter, T. 2005, ApJ, 628, 426 2
Rauer, H., Catala, C., Aerts, C., et al. 2014, Experimental Astronomy, 38, 249 1
Ribas, I. 2006, Ap&SS, 304, 89 2
Ricker, G. R., Winn, J. N., Vanderspek, R., et al. 2015, Journal of Astronomical

Telescopes, Instruments, and Systems, 1, 014003 1

Rogers, T. M. 2015, ApJ, 815, L30 2
Rogers, T. M., Lin, D. N. C., McElwaine, J. N., & Lau, H. H. B. 2013, ApJ, 772,

21 2

Rossiter, R. A. 1924, ApJ, 60, 15 2, 4
Rucinski, S. M. 1992, AJ, 104, 1968 2
Schmid, V. S. & Aerts, C. 2016, A&A, 592, A116 2
Schmid, V. S., Tkachenko, A., Aerts, C., et al. 2015, A&A, 584, A35 2
Sekaran, S., Tkachenko, A., Abdul-Masih, M., et al. 2020, A&A, 643, A162 2
Sekaran, S., Tkachenko, A., Johnston, C., & Aerts, C. 2021, A&A, 648, A91 2
Sennhauser, C. & Berdyugina, S. V. 2010, A&A, 522, A57 3
Sennhauser, C., Berdyugina, S. V., & Fluri, D. M. 2009, A&A, 507, 1711 3
Slawson, R. W., Prša, A., Welsh, W. F., et al. 2011, AJ, 142, 160 2
Southworth, J. 2013, A&A, 557, A119 2
Southworth, J. 2021, Universe, 7, 369 2
Southworth, J., Maxted, P. F. L., & Smalley, B. 2004, MNRAS, 351, 1277 2
Soydugan, E., Soydugan, F.,
Nachrichten, 327, 905 7

Ibano˘glu, C., et al. 2006, Astronomische

Strachan, J. B. P. & Anglada-Escudé, G. 2017, MNRAS, 472, 3467 3
Tkachenko, A., Degroote, P., Aerts, C., et al. 2014, MNRAS, 438, 3093 2
Tkachenko, A., Lehmann, H., & Mkrtichian, D. E. 2009, A&A, 504, 991 7
Tkachenko, A., Pavlovski, K., Johnston, C., et al. 2020, A&A, 637, A60 2
Tkachenko, A., Van Reeth, T., Tsymbal, V., et al. 2013, A&A, 560, A37 3, 4, 5,

7, 13

Torres, G., Andersen, J., & Giménez, A. 2010, A&A Rev., 18, 67 2
Triaud, A. H. M. J. 2018, The Rossiter-McLaughlin Eﬀect in Exoplanet Re-

search, 2 2

Tsymbal, V. 1996, in Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc Conference Series,
Vol. 108, M.A.S.S., Model Atmospheres and Spectrum Synthesis, ed. S. J.
Adelman, F. Kupka, & W. W. Weiss, 198 4

Vidal, J., Cébron, D., ud-Doula, A., & Alecian, E. 2019, A&A, 629, A142 2
Walker, G., Matthews, J., Kuschnig, R., et al. 2003, PASP, 115, 1023 1
Wang, S., Addison, B., Fischer, D. A., et al. 2018, AJ, 155, 70 2
Welsh, W. F., Orosz, J. A., Aerts, C., et al. 2011, ApJS, 197, 4 2
Wilson, R. E. & Devinney, E. J. 1971, ApJ, 166, 605 2

Article number, page 17 of 17

