Pure Data and INScore: Animated

notation for new music

Patricio F. Calatayud

Faculty member, UNAM

patricio.tics@gmail.com

Abstract: New music is made with computers, taking advantage of its graphics displays rather than its audio

algorithms. Pure Data can be used to compose them. This essay will show a case study that uses Pure Data, in

connection with INScore, for making a new type of score that uses animated notation or dynamic musicography

for making music with performers. This sample was made by the author of the text, and it will show a number of

notation possibilities that can be done using the combination of software. This will be accompanied by a simple

prediction of what a musician could perform with it.

Keywords: Computer music, Animated notation, Pure Data, INScore.

1 Introduction

Music made with computers gained a change in direction in the last decades. Instead of

only using their audio capabilities, many composers started to use their graphic power to

compose music, generating scores that serves as a mediation between a creator and music

performers (Hope 2017). Influenced by the Indeterminacy movement (e.g. Calder’s piece by

Earl Brown (1966)), many composers started to work on the expanded possibilities of

connecting computer power, and the musician's gesture when performing dynamic

musicography. The later concept refers to all drawings that are annotated in a music score, and

have the intention to be gestures (i.e. are intended to have a musical utterance).

This connection could not be possible if all the available software were expensive,

complex and subject to strict copyright laws. Fortunately, Pure Data (1997) is capable of

working with complex algorithms to make music, and also it is open-free software. Although,

in its beginnings it was designed to process audio information to obtain sound, there’s always

been the possibility of generating only data, and with the emergence of INScore (2010), we

have the possibility of making music scores that can be transformed continuously,

in

real-time.

2 Animated notation and Dynamic musicography

Music made with computers normally takes advantage of audio algorithms and automated

sequences for producing sound. Now we have a series of tools that uses the power of

computers to mediate between a composer, and music performers: Animated notation or

Dynamic musicography.

We must make a distinction. We can make music using computers for transcribing a

score. Amongst those, are the ones that use the capabilities of computers to imitate what is

outside of them (like score transcriptions of manuscripts or OMR digitalization). There are

other music scores built inside the computer using their algorithm power (Arias et al. 2014,

Oliver 2014). Much of those scores don’t even need to be printed in paper, with its projection

on a screen is enough to send musical information to a performer. The scores that we are

presenting here are the ones that propose a change in music performance by changes in the

presentation of notation, rather its complexity (see Hope 2017, Ross-Smith 2015). Dynamic

musicography or animated notation transforms the score and the music notation with the aim

of producing another type of musical gesture, and not necessarily a change in sound.

3 Case study

The basic notation material came from an old string quartet of the author of the text. A

segmentation process took place, selecting a number of fragments that were transcribed again

in MuseScore (2002), and exported as MIDI. This MIDI was imported in NoteAbilityPro

(2000) for the purpose of generating a GUIDO notation file format (1998) that was

appropriate for INScore, its graphics quality, and the possibility of modulating the information

noted in the original fragments.

2

FIGURE 1 – Fragment of a string quartet extracted from its original

context. Drawing made with MuseScore. Source: The author of the text (2019)

Also, for performing purposes we programmed four scrolling lines, each one in a

different color, for the performers to follow. A line goes over a score fragment, as MuseScore

does when it is getting audio from it. The idea is that each performer reads its part at his own

time, also with the possibility of bending the scrolling line, getting another type of

performance effect.

FIGURE 2 – Fragment of the new string quartet, displayed on the INScore

scene. The image shows the four colored lines for each musician. Source: The

author of the text (2019)

4 OSC implementation between Pure Data and INScore

Thanks to the enormous community that helps Pure Data users, we have a nurtured

number of examples of OSC communications between any software and Pure Data. Although

it is not easy to make the connection between the INScore software and Pure Data, when the

two of them finally speak to each other, we can make transformations in the music notation,

and let creativity flow.

The OSC messages formatting was initially a problem. Programming is not necessarily a

composer’s task -at least at this moment. So, the strategy was, as the reader may expect, dive

into the many communities that Pure Data has. Unfortunately, when the case study was

composed (2019), there were not many resources to find a patch that made the connection

3

between the softwares; the documentation of INScore was implemented with a non-vanilla

object -and its implications.

Fortunately, the Iglesias’ MobMuPlat (2016) formatting subpatch did the work, and a

connection was made successfully. A small problem came after with the float to integer

conversion, but this was solved with the aid of the facebook Pure Data community.

FIGURE 3 – Two examples of OSC patching in Pure Data.

5 Possibilities of new notation enhanced by Pure Data in

combination with INScore

The listed possibilities below were made with Pure Data as the engine for sending

continuous controller messages in OSC format to INScore, to be displayed on a screen. The

information that modulates the fragments can be sent in all the possible strategies that digital

musicians know: Algorithmic, statistical, stochastic, or any type of information strategy, and it

can be performed in real-time or sequenced.

The results of the experimentation will be described as the INScore type of message and

its implementation, followed by a way in which a musician can perform this feature.

a) The alpha channel gives the possibility of a “fade” effect on the score.

A crescendo or decrescendo is a possibility.

4

FIGURE 4 – Fragment of the new string quartet, displayed on the INScore

scene. The score is fading in.

b) The X and Y planes can displace the fragments in the space made for the

score.1

A movement in the X plane could be performed as change in the onset of the fragment,

meaning a phasing texture, reflected between players.

Differentiations in the Y plane could be interpreted as Guido d’Arezzo understood:

Changes in pitch. The fragment could be performed in a different

interval (a kind of

solmization) mapping a center location and its actual location.

c) Blurring or shadowing FX

Among all visual effects that we can use, INScore comes with a blurring one, useful to

make distortion types of interpretation or, in the way it is used in the case study, a layering

effect. There is also a similar effect called “shadow” that does mostly the same to the

fragment. Also, we could get the opposite effect by changing the brightness or contrast of the

fragment.

1 In a mathematical way it is useful to distinguish between a transformation in the music notation, and the ones
made on the space that they are displayed. The latter admits continuous transformations in the score as well.

5

FIGURE 5 – Fragment of the new string quartet, displayed on the INScore

scene. There are 4 fragments, three of them blurred.

d) Changes in color

Perhaps the most wanted effect

in synesthesia simulations,

like the ones made by

Scriabin, the color of the notes or the fragment calls for a necessary dialog between composer

and performer. It could be used for dynamic purposes, as in the work of Hoadley (2015).

FIGURE 6 – Fragment of the new string quartet, displayed on the INScore

scene. Fragments colored for each musician.

6

e) Scaling

Another effect that comes with INScore is a scaling factor that can be used for dynamic

purposes, as in the Jatekok pieces by Gÿorgÿ Kurtag (1973-).

f) Angle can be done as a parameter of any individual fragment.

This is perhaps the most difficult one to perform. How could we perform differently the

work Mobile-stabile of Silvano Bussotti (1959)?

Even in the times of the Augenmusik these types of angle transformations were

performed as if they were in a normal position. A dialog between the performer and the

composer is necessary. Again, the way that it is used in the case study is bending the arch

position, accordingly.

FIGURE 7 – Fragment of the new string quartet, displayed on the INScore

scene. Fragments are displayed in a “star” angle.

g) Overlapping can be done with the X and Y planes.

The segmentation of the score is an arbitrary decision that can be approached by

overlapping fragments and getting something different than a readability issue. Even a chord

or an extension of a melody. This kind of transformation can be seen in the work of Mauricio

Kagel’s Prima Vista (1962-64).

7

FIGURE 8 – Fragment of the new string quartet, displayed on the INScore

scene. Fragments are overlapped.

There are also all other algorithmic possibilities of music display and material

construction that are possible between Pure Data and OpenMusic (1998-), PGWL (2003) or

like Oliver's implementation (2015).

On the other hand, these types of notation transformations are useful in a pedagogy field

or even a research one. With the intent of demonstrating this, we take a small complement to

the before study case, and present these “readability experiments”, made with the purpose of

asking the musicians what can be performed with a series of continuous transformations of

notation, and its mathematical possibilities for analysis.

These exercises were made with the same structure as the one that we already explained,

with the sole distinction of its target.

8

FIGURE 9 – Readability experiment “rotation a”..

FIGURE 10 – Readability experiment “blurring”.

6 Conclusions and future work

For some composers, fixed notation is a thing from the past. Each improvement in

writing technologies changed the way we write. Exercises like those described above show

that music performance has a way to expand its practices, and hopefully generate music in the

process. These dynamic notations can also be used with visual art as iconographic material.

As this type of writing gradually becomes popular, many musicians will be setting a new

ground of grammatical and orthographic rules that can be applied to this notation. Fortunately,

Pure Data, with all its benefits, allows these strategies to come to take place in the music

environment.

7 Acknowledgements

… for the intelligence of mathematics and cognition, needed for developing this project.

8 References

ARIAS, J.; DESAINTE-CATHERINE, M.; SALVATI, S.; & RUEDA, C. (2014).

Executing Hierarchical

Interactive Scores in ReactiveML.

In Journées d’Informatique

Musicale, JIM 2014, Bourges, France, May 21-23, 2014 (pp. 25–34). Available on

https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01095159 (April, 2021). https://github.com/himito/ritmos

(April 2021).

BROWN, E. (1966). Calder’s piece. New York: Editions Peters (2007).

BUSSOTTI, S. (1959) Mobile-stabile (N. 5 da Sette fogli, una collezione occulta), per

chitarre, canto e pianoforte. London: Universal Edition (1963).

9

FOBER, Dominique; DAUDIN, Christophe; LETZ, Stéphane; & ORLAREY, Yann.

(2010) Partitions musicales augmentées. Journées d'Informatique Musicale, Rennes, France.

pp.97-103. ⟨hal-02158956⟩ Available at http://inscore.sourceforge.net/ (April 2021).

FOBER, Dominique; ORLAREY, Yann; & LETZ, Stéphane. INScore Time Model.

International Computer Music Conference, 2017, Shanghai, China. pp. 64-68. ⟨hal-02158977⟩

Available on https://hal.parisnanterre.fr/INSCORE/hal-02158977v1 (April 2021).

HAAS C. (1990) Composing in Technological Contexts: A Study of Note-Making.

Written Communication, 7(4):512-547. doi:10.1177/0741088390007004004

HAMEL,

Keith

(2000-2020).

NoteAbilityPro.

Available

at

http://debussy.music.ubc.ca/NoteAbility/ (April 2021).

HOADLEY, R., & BATTIER, M. (2015). SEMAPHORE: Cross-Domain Expressive

Mapping with Live Notation.

Institut de Recherche en Musicologie. Available at

http://rhoadley.net/wp/?p=133

HOPE, C.

(2017). Electronic Scores for Music: The Possibilities of Animated

Notation. Computer Music Journal, 41, 21-35. https://doi.org/10.1162/comj_a_00427

HOOS, Holger H.

(1998). The Guido Music Notation

format. Available at

https://guidodoc.grame.fr/ (April 2021).

IGLESIA, D. (2016). The Mobility is the Message : the Development and Uses of

MobMuPlat.

Available

at

https://www.danieliglesia.com/mobmuplat/IglesiaMobMuPlatPaper.pdf (April 2021).

IRCAM. (1998-). OpenMusic. Available at https://openmusic-project.github.io/ (April

2021).

KAGEL, Mauricio. (1962-1964). Prima Vista, for diapositive and a sound sources.

Vienna: Universal Edition (2003).

KURTAG, György (1973-). Jatékok I, for piano. Budapest: Editio Musica Budapest

(1979).

10

LAURSON, M.; KUSSKANKARE, M.; & NORILO, V. (2009). An Overview of PWGL,

a Visual Programming Environment for Music. Computer Music Journal, 33(1), 19-31.

Retrieved April 10, 2021, from http://www.jstor.org/stable/40301009

OLIVER, J. (2014). [Notes]: Interactive Computer Assisted Notation with Pure Data and

Lilypond.

Available

on

http://www.jaimeoliver.pe/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/notes-OliverLaRosa-CICTEM15.pdf

(April 2021)

PUCKETTE, Miller S.

(1997). Pure Data: Another

Integrated Computer Music

Environment. In Proceedings, Second Intercollege Computer Music Concerts, Tachikawa, pp.

37-41. Available at https://puredata.info/docs/articles/puredata1997 (April 2021).

ROSS SMITH, Ryan. (2015). An Atomic Approach to Animated Music Notation. In

Proceedings of the First International Conference on Technologies for Music Notation and

Representation, pp. 39–47. Paris, France:

Institut de Recherche en Musicologie.

http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.923775

SCHWEER, Werner. (2002). MuseScore.

Available at https://musescore.org/ (April

2021).

SCRIABIN, Alexander.

(1910). Prometheus: The poem of fire. Op. 60. London:

Eulenburg (1984).

11

