What happens to psychological safety 
when going remote? 

Anastasiia Tkalich, SINTEF, Trondheim, 7034, Norway 

Darja Smite, Blekinge Institute of Technology, 371 41, Sweden 

Nina Haugland Andersen, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, 7034, Norway 

Nils Brede Moe, SINTEF, Trondheim, 7034, Norway

Psychological safety is a precondition for learning and success in software teams. Companies such as 
SavingsBank, which is discussed in this article, have developed good practices to facilitate psychological 
safety, most of which depend on face-to-face interaction. However, what happens to psychological 
safety when working remotely? In this article, we explore how Norwegian software developers 
experienced pandemic and post-pandemic remote work and describe simple behaviors and attitudes 
related to psychological safety. We pay special attention to the hybrid work mode, in which team 
members alternate days in the office with days working from home. Our key takeaway is that 
spontaneous interaction in the office facilitates psychological safety, while remote work increases the 
thresholds for both spontaneous interaction and psychological safety. We recommend that software 
teams synchronize their office presence to increase chances for spontaneous interaction in the office 
while benefitting from focused work while at home. 

companies.  Society’s 

Professional work life has likely split irreversibly into pre-
pandemic  and  post-pandemic  times,  as  the  better-than-
expected work from home (WFH) pandemic experiences1 
changed the prevalence and perception of remote work in 
software 
clearly 
demonstrates that employees’ willingness to return to the 
office  differs  greatly.  Some  return  to  their  pre-pandemic 
routines,  some  visit  the  office  only  a  few  days  per  week 
and  spend  most  of  their  time  working  from  home,  and 
others prefer to continue to WFH indefinitely. As a result, 
predominantly  onsite work routines are being adjusted to 
the “new norm” or the hybrid work mode.  

reopening 

Remote work is not a new phenomenon. The first studies 
on “teleworking” appeared in the 70s and regarded it as a 
temporary and often partial practice chosen by few2. The 
rise of popularity of offshoring in the late 90s increased the 
prevalence of remote work as projects became distributed3. 
Yet,  remote  WFH  has  never  been  so  widespread.  Thus, 
questions  related  to  the  impact  of  WFH  on  software 
development  practices  have  been  in  the  spotlight  of 
research and  practice.  So  far,  WFH research  has  focused 
on  individual  experiences,  primarily  productivity4,5,6  and 
well-being7,  identifying  more  benefits  than  challenges. 
However, individual gains in productivity  enabled by the 
absence of office interruptions have been debated in team-
oriented research that highlights the importance of constant 
connectivity  among  teammates8.  Teams  in  fully  remote 
WFH  mode  suffer  from  a  limited  ability  to  brainstorm, 
difficulty communicating, and decreased satisfaction with 

interactions  from  social  activities9.  Similarly,  prior  work 
on partially dispersed teams (relevant in the hybrid work 
mode, in which developers alternate their office days with 
WFH)  suggests  that  remoters  tend  to  have  significantly 
reduced team cohesion, poor awareness of “who did what” 
and  “who  knows  what,”  divergent  viewpoints,  conflicts, 
and coordination problems10. While the hybrid workplace 
promises to reduce remote working  due to episodical co-
located work, there is no clear understanding of the impact 
of hybrid work on successful team functioning.  

Psychological safety (see the Sidebar) is among the social 
factors  that  might  be  threatened  by  remote  and  hybrid 
work.  While  psychological  safety  contributes  to  team 
learning, commitment, and performance11,12, little is known 
team 
about  how 
psychological  safety.  Given that  the  hybrid  workplace  is 
our  future,  this  knowledge  might  be  crucial  for  avoiding 
painful mistakes.  

remote  and  hybrid  work  affect 

In  this  article,  we  describe  how  psychological  safety  is 
affected by hybrid work in SavingsBank (company’s name 
is  anonymized  for  confidentiality  reasons).  Lessons 
learned from our study comprise organizational practices 
that increase psychological safety in teams working onsite 
and  remotely  as  well  as  changes  in  team  behaviors  and 
attitudes in different work modes.  

 
 
 
 
 
is  psychological 

Sidebar:  What 
safety? 
Psychological  safety  is  an  important  cognitive  and 
interpersonal  concept  that  relates  to  several  positive 
outcomes  in  software  teams.  Psychological  safety  is 
defined as “a shared belief held by members of a team that 
the  team  is  safe  for  interpersonal  risk-taking.”13  A 
psychologically safe environment minimizes the potential 
negative  consequences  of  making  mistakes  or  taking 
initiative,  which  refocuses  teams  on  a  task  instead  of 
interpersonal  problems  and  thus  improves  performance. 
Psychological  safety  is  positively  related  to  information 
sharing, 
learning  behaviors,  employee  engagement, 
satisfaction, and commitment of team members11. Teams 
with high psychological safety perform better than those in 
which it is low12. 

Edmondson made a fundamental contribution to defining 
and  measuring  team  psychological  safety  in  199913, 
explaining it briefly as a sense of confidence among team 
members that fellow teammates will not embarrass, reject, 
or punish them for speaking up. She suggested seven items 
combining  behavioral,  affective,  and  cognitive  aspects, 
including “It is safe to take a risk on this team” and “It is 
difficult  to  ask  other  members  of  this  team  for  help.” 
Inspired  by  these  items  and  Edmondson’s  work,  we 
formulated 
that  we  believe 
collectively  reflect  how  psychological  safety  can  be 
observed  in  the  behaviors  and  attitudes  of  members  of 
software  teams (read more  in the supplemental material). 
The core dimensions are as follows:      

four  core  dimensions 

1.  Safe to be honest: Teammates share ideas, opinions, and 
concerns  and  bring  up  problems  and  tough  issues 
without fear of social penalty.  

2.  Safe to make mistakes: Teammates perceive it to be okay 
to make mistakes and do not blame but instead focus on 
learning from constructive feedback. 

3.  Safe to ask for help: Teammates perceive that it is easy 

to ask others for help. 

4.  Valuing  each  other:  Teammates  believe  that  their 
efforts  will  not  be  deliberately  undermined 
(downgraded, overlooked, or ignored), have a positive 
attitude  toward  each  other‘s  contributions,  give 
frequent  positive  feedback,  and  acknowledge  each 
member‘s skills, talents, and inputs.  

The SavingsBank Case 

We  performed  a  longitudinal  study  of  three  teams  from 
SavingsBank  during  and  after  the  COVID-19  pandemic 
(fall  2020-winter  2022).  SavingsBank  is  a  software 
development company owned by an alliance of banks that 
employed 24 software teams in two locations in Norway. 
In  March  2020,  employees  moved  from  predominantly 
onsite  work  to  100%  WFH  due  to  government-enforced 
regulations. Offices were open only for special needs (for 
example, to run tests on a specific network). For all, offices 
reopened and closed repeatedly in response to the reduced 
or  increased  virus  spread  (open  in  the  summer  2020  and 
2021, closed in the fall 2020 and 2021). When open, offices 
had certain restrictions (limited presence in the offices and 
in  meeting  rooms;  social  distancing)  and  rather  low 
occupation, not exceeding 60% (see Figure 1). In February 
2022, the offices opened without  restrictions. Since then, 
teams are expected at the office at least two days per week, 
which the teams can choose themselves.  

FIGURE 1. Employee attendance in fall 2021 

the 

had 

Due to work being distributed across two Norwegian sites 
pre-pandemic,  SavingsBank 
appropriate 
conditions and infrastructure to move to WFH. However, 
remote work  had not been common in  all teams, and not 
everyone  had  established  practices  for  collaboration 
outside  of  the  office  walls.  SavingsBank’s  focus  on 
autonomous  working  was  another  facilitator  of  WFH. 
Practitioners  describe  SavingsBank  as  a  leading  agile 
state-of-the-art 
environment 
collaboration  methods  and  technologies  and  focusing  on 
teams’ autonomy, as evident in the following quote: 

in  Norway 

using 

We  made  some  general  rules,  but  were  cautious 
with  telling  teams  how  to  organize  their  work 

2 

Psychological safety in remote work 

July 2022 

Week42, October202150%25%300150Week43, October2021Mon  TueWedThu   Fri Mon  TueWedThu   Fri Office work: Offices reopened due to decreased virus spread. Managementencourages employees to return to the office, especially on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays.Work from home: Allowedformax3daysaweek.Concrete decisions are delegated to teams: who works from home when, how many days and whether there are any mandatoryofficedays (aligned or not).Office presence: No more than 60%. Highest attendance in the middle of the week, due to Wednesday social sessions,introduced by management to attract people to the office 
 
 
 
  
[onsite vs. WFH]. Teams are allowed to find what 
suits them best. [Development manager] 

The whole point of FridayWins is to acknowledge 
each other´s achievements. [Developer, Team B] 

We conducted 16 semi-structured interviews with various 
stakeholders:  six  interviews  with  members  of  three 
software  teams  (in-house  developers,  a  designer,  and 
consultants)  in February-March  2021  (remote  mode),  six 
interviews  in  November  2021-January  2022  (hybrid 
mode), and four interviews with the HR manager and the 
development  manager  (twice  each).  Participants’  team 
experience ranged between several months and 2.5 years. 
We also collected the leadership group’s feedback on our 
findings and analyzed secondary  survey data gathered by 
SavingsBank  between  summer  2020  and  summer  2022 
(developers’  preferences  for  WFH,  job  satisfaction, 
meetings data, office attendance, and strategy documents) 
and  other  internal  documents.  For  more  details,  see  the 
supplementary material. 

SavingsBank  practices  that  support 
psychological safety 

Psychological  safety  was  a  strategic  focus  area  for 
SavingsBank,  even  pre-pandemic.  Herein,  we  describe 
corporate routines facilitating psychological safety, which 
were found useful especially when working remotely.  

Pull  requests  (PRs), 
the  standard  mechanism  for 
reviewing  code,  facilitate  the  exchange  of  feedback  on 
code changes. Reviewers and contributors’ interactions are 
documented in discussion threads and are available to all. 
PRs  foster  knowledge  sharing,  early  feedback,  and 
increased  collaboration  and  reduce  the  risk  of  putting 
flawed code into production. Developers describe PRs as a 
means of sharing responsibility if something goes wrong:  
PR  is  a  good  safety  net  [...]  when  I  write  code, 
there is nothing that is put into production unless 
others have looked at it too. [Developer, Team C] 

Monday commitments and FridayWins are weekly team 
meetings. Monday commitments gather teammates for ~15 
minutes to discuss progress toward team goals and weekly 
focus  to  reach  the  goal,  and  they  prioritize  tasks  for 
inclusion in the board. FridayWins (~30 minutes) focus on 
celebrating  teams’  achievements  and  are  important  for 
increasing psychological safety:  

Postmortems are team meetings that follow a significant 
failure.  Several  participants  described  postmortems  as 
crucial  for  an  environment  in  which  it  is  safe  to  make 
it  helps  avoid  scapegoating  and 
mistakes  because 
strengthens  organizational  norms  of 
from 
mistakes: 

learning 

Postmortems  are  really  great;  they  do  not  only 
emphasize  that  we  should  not  blame  each  other, 
but  also  [help  us]  achieve 
in  practice. 
[Developer, Team A] 

it 

20%  time  has  been  SavingsBank’s  policy  since  2018, 
allowing employees  to dedicate  one weekday to building 
new competencies and developing architecture, tools, and 
practices together. Participants described it as positive in 
terms of feeling professionally valued by the company: 
It is unique that we can use one weekday like this; 
I  feel  my  company  appreciates  my  skills  and 
further  professional  development. 
supports 
[Developer, Team B] 

Demos  with  customers  allow teams to  regularly  present 
and  discuss  the  latest  features  and  facilitate  professional 
acknowledgement by colleagues:  

We  often  get  comments  after  such  demos,  for 
example,  on  Slack,  where  our team  lead  can  say 
“Great  job  today,  Tommy,”  and  then  others  join 
and add clapping and thumbs up icons, as thanks. 
[Developer, Team A] 

Team behaviors when going hybrid  

We  found  that  hybrid  modes  were  twofold:  misaligned 
mode,  in  which  members  decided  when  to  work  in  the 
office  or  from  home  impromptu,  and  aligned  mode,  in 
which members had agreed-upon common office days. In 
the 
teammates  used 
organizational  practices  and  reflected  on  the  changes  in 
behaviors  and  attitudes  along  four  dimensions  of 
psychological safety, outlined in the Sidebar, in different 
work modes: onsite, remote, or hybrid (See Figure 2).  

following,  we  describe  how 

July 2022 

Psychological safety in remote work  

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 2. Behaviors and attitudes that indicate psychological safety in various work modes 

#1. Safe to be honest 

Speaking up in meetings was perceived to be easier face-
to-face than remotely. We learned that the absence of non-
verbal  cues  makes  some  more  hesitant  to  participate  in 

discussions and more focused on listening, while technical 
delays in communication make people hold back due to the 
fear  of  interrupting.  Online  meetings  demand  more 
structure and effort to stimulate engagement, while onsite 

4 

Psychological safety in remote work 

July 2022 

 
 
 
 
meetings  facilitate  a  more  dynamic  and  spontaneous 
exchange of opinions: 

Clearly,  the threshold  for  joining  a  discussion  is 
much  higher  when  you  join  a  digital  meeting 
compared  to  when  you  join  physically.  [...]  If 
several  people  are  participating  physically,  you 
can easily notice that the digital group becomes a 
little  passive  because  the  activity  in  the  room 
overruns  what  digital  participants  are  saying. 
[Designer, Team A] 

critical 

Providing 
feedback.  When  working 
remotely,  team  members  relied  heavily  on  written 
communication,  which  created  barriers  to  providing 
critical 
frequent 
misunderstandings: 

feedback 

because 

of 

The  written  format  makes things ruder  and  more 
negative than meant. If you criticize in a physical 
mode,  one  can  easily  solve  it  by  discussing. 
[Designer, Team A] 

To  avoid  misunderstandings,  many  preferred  to  follow 
written feedback up with a conversation, which is easier to 
accommodate in the office. In the hybrid mode, we learned 
that remoters are unlikely to share critical feedback, and if 
sharing,  rarely  follow  it  up  because  of  the  hurdles  of 
scheduling  online  meetings. 
lack  of 
spontaneous interaction in remote and hybrid modes was 
mentioned frequently as the major impediment. Evidently, 
in the hybrid mode, remoters are likely to work in isolation 
without frequent feedback. 

fact, 

the 

In 

“stupid”  questions.  Several 

Asking 
informants 
mentioned  the  importance  of  being  able  to  ask  silly 
questions  as  a  sign  of  psychological  safety  in  a  team. 
Interestingly, we found that this was never easy due to the 
possible embarrassment. In the office, silly questions can 
be overheard, while questions posted in team channels can 
be  read  by  everyone,  leading  to  possible  public  shame. 
This  was  especially  problematic  for  new  hires  and 
inexperienced members who feared revealing their lack of 
competence and had higher barriers to approach others. We 
learned  that  asking  silly  questions  required  training  and 
was  easier  in  personal  inquiry  (e.g.,  by  using  chats  and 
scheduling short video calls):  

Now I tend to just send a message and ask if one 
has time for a small conversation. […] I started to 
ask “stupid” questions as early as possible just to 
be less afraid. [Developer, Team A] 

#2. Safe to make mistakes 

Requesting  feedback  on  unfinished  work.  When  team 
members show unfinished design sketch or code, they are 
likely  to  expose  mistakes.  In  the  SavingsBank  teams, 
members were not afraid to reveal such mistakes. We also 
learned that  feedback requests are often spontaneous and 
thus  easier  to  make  in  the  office,  such  as  by  inviting 
someone  to  look  at  a  screen  or  whiteboard.  Sharing 
unfinished work remotely was said to be harder because it 
takes  additional  effort  to  initiate  and  because  of  the 
possible delay in receiving feedback:  

If one shows a design at the office, one can receive 
instant feedback  and  maybe explain  why  one  did 
what  one  did.  This  is  way  easier  than to  write  a 
whole thesis on Slack. [Designer, Team A] 

Not  punishing  or  blaming  team  members  for making 
mistakes. All our participants agreed that they did not fear 
making mistakes because of well-established routines and 
the culture of treating  mistakes as learning  opportunities, 
and  discussing  them  openly  in  dedicated  postmortems. 
Further,  teams  cultivated  shared  responsibility  for  code 
quality, fostered by code review routines (PRs):  

If something is wrong that is approved and goes all 
the way out, then […] no one becomes a scapegoat, 
and you all solve it together. [Developer, Team B] 

#3. Safe to ask for help 

Asking  each  other  for  help.  Any  request  directed  to 
teammates  leads  to  disturbances,  and  we  found  that 
disturbing others in the office was easier due to contextual 
clues  that  help  evaluate  whether  people  are  busy  or  not. 
Such  clues  were  absent  when  working  remotely  or  for 
remoters in the hybrid mode, for whom the threshold for 
asking for help increases. The absence of spontaneous peer 
help can lead to additional time spent on solving problems 
in  isolation.  Interestingly,  we  found  that  experiences  of 
onsite or hybrid teamwork among the new hires increased 
their chances of exhibiting psychologically safe behaviors 
when  working  remotely.  A  newly  hired  developer 
explained, 

It  takes  me  longer  to  ask  for  help  when  I  sit  at 
home.  […]  But  I  felt  safer  in  asking  for  help 
digitally because I have now spent some time with 
the team physically and had some informal talks. 
[Developer, Team B] 

Further, a worker´s likelihood of asking for help depended 
on the perceived timeliness of the feedback. In the office, 
help  requests  were  processed  within  seconds  or  easily 
followed by a reminder (knocks on the door, comments at 

July 2022 

Psychological safety in remote work  

5 

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
the  coffee  machine).  When  working  remotely  (in remote 
and hybrid modes), members could not be certain whether 
and  when  the feedback  would  come.  A  senior  developer 
explained that response times and ways to handle requests 
varied greatly:  

Some  are like  “I  am  a little  busy  now,  but  I  will 
look  at  it  ASAP.”  Others  you  don´t  get  much 
response from, and in a couple of days, they return 
with  a  perfect  answer  with  tons  of  details.  [...] 
Some  become  bottlenecks,  I  wait  and  nag… 
[Developer, Team A] 

     #4. Valuing each other  

other 

positive 

feedback 

and 
Giving 
each 
acknowledging 
feedback  was 
the  effort.  Positive 
important  to  feel  valued  in  the  team.  Sharing  positive 
feedback face-to-face was found to be effortless,  and the 
emotional effect of such feedback was stronger than that of 
written feedback shared remotely or in online meetings. In 
fact,  the  probability  of  receiving  extensive  positive 
feedback  remotely  decreased.  We  found  that  positive 
feedback in team channels was often limited to the use of 
digital icons: 

What have we learned? 
Perhaps not surprisingly, we found remote work to hinder 
psychological  safety  in  teams.  Overall,  we  conclude  that 
many  behaviors  and  attitudes  related  to  psychological 
safety are fostered by spontaneity of interaction (see Figure 
3).  Office  presence  facilitates  spontaneous  questions, 
requesting/giving  feedback,  speaking  up,  ideating,  and 
including each other. The threshold for such behaviors is 
higher  when  working  remotely,  as  digital  interactions 
require upfront planning, waiting for a response, arranging 
the digital setup, or overcoming technical issues. Besides, 
the  absence  of  contextual  clues  for  remoters  makes  it 
harder 
to  avoid  unwelcome 
interruptions. Interestingly, the hybrid mode increases the 
chances of spontaneous interaction for those in the office, 
but  simultaneously  leads  to  splitting  the  team  into 
subgroups or alienating individual members, thus reducing 
the team’s psychological safety.  However, do not get too 
pessimistic; we also learned that teams with synchronous 
office  presence  experience  fewer  challenges,  are  able  to 
interact spontaneously when working onsite, and tap into 
the benefits of remote WFH without alienation or division 
into subgroups.  

interactions 

time 

to 

…  then  many  thumbs  up  and  celebrative  emojis 
appear.  So, 
there  are  many  such  micro-
interactions. [Developer, Team C] 

PR  comments  were  another  way 
contributions: 

to  acknowledge 

I  can  answer  the  PR  comments  like,  “Wow,  I 
haven´t thought about it!” and sometimes maybe I 
say “Thanks.” [Developer, Team B] 

Feeling of belonging in the team. Participants agreed that 
the  feeling  of  being  valued  contributed  to  the  feeling  of 
belonging,  which  was  strengthened  through  numerous 
spontaneous  office  interactions  and  exchange  of  positive 
feedback.  When  working  remotely, 
the  feeling  of 
belonging  was  weaker,  especially  among  new  hires  who 
had not managed to develop informal bonds: 

In the office, you get to talk about what you did on 
the weekend and what goes on in life. This leads to 
stronger  bonds  and  to  the  feeling  of  belonging. 
[Designer, Team A] 

We also found that the hybrid mode can alienate remoters, 
as they are excluded from spontaneous office discussions 
and have a feeling of missing out on what is going on in 
the team.  

For  those  concerned  about  the  practicability  of  hybrid 
work, we would like to emphasize a few important benefits 
of WFH, when done wisely. Some interviewees associated 
WFH with increased individual productivity thanks to the 
ability  to  stay  focused,  as  found  in  related  research6. 
Interruptions,  which  are  common  when  working  face-to-
face, may cost up to 10-15 min in terms of regaining one’s 
focus14,  and  one  rarely  has  control  over  how  often  and 
when they are  interrupted.  Although remote work can be 
challenging  for  some,  we  found  that  teams  adjust  their 
tactical  approaches 
these  challenges 
successfully.  Our  participants  used  break-out  rooms  to 
foster active participation, implemented Huddle to contact 
each other more easily, and made many other adjustments 
for convenient remote work.  

to  overcome 

For  teams,  we  recommend  finding  effective  ways  to 
promote 
the  onsite  collaboration  and  spontaneous 
interactions  necessary for  psychological  safety  alternated 
with  vital  time  for  focused  individual  work  remotely. 
However, we have no  golden rule for how many days in 
the  office/home  are  optimal.  We  suggest focusing  future 
research  on  finding  ways  to  simulate  spontaneity  of 
computer-mediated  interaction, for  example,  by  adapting 

6 

Psychological safety in remote work 

July 2022 

 
 
 
 
 
 
tools that provide additional contextual clues (open  video 
rooms, status labels15).  

Finally, we found that organizational norms and routines 
are  effective  at  supporting  team  psychological  safety. 
Institutionalized  practices  such  as  post-mortems  and  PRs 
support  the  safety  to  make  mistakes,  while  FridayWins, 
20% time, and customer demos help members feel valued. 
We  also  found  that  such  practices  are  equally  powerful 
when  working  onsite  and  remotely.  Other  practices  that 

help with psychological safety are mandatory office days 
and  forming  teams  with  synched  preferences  for  office 
presence, which are important directions for further study. 
For  now,  we  found  one successful case in  SavingsBank, 
when  a  developer  switched  teams  to  work  with  like-
minded  teammates.  We  believe  such  actions  can  help 
companies balance the need to maintain strong teams and 
provide  flexibility  in  choosing  effective  individual  work 
modes

FIGURE 3. A relationship between focus and ability for spontaneous interaction in different work modes

References 
1.  J.  M.  Barrero,  N.  Bloom,  and  S.  J.  Davis,  “Why  working 
from  home  will  stick”,  Centre  for  Economic  Performance 
London,  UK,  No.  1790,  2021.Accessed:  Jul.  13,  2022 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/113912/1/dp1790.pdf  

2.  J.  H.  Pratt,  «Home  Teleworking:  A  Study  of  its  Pioneers. 
Technological  Forecasting  and  Social  Change»,  Japan 
Society for Research Policy and Innovation Management, 
vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 1-14, 1984. 

3.    J.  T.  Polzer,  C.  B.  Crisp,  S.  L.  Jarvenpaa,  J.  W.  Kim, 
“Extending the faultline model to geographically dispersed 
teams:  How  colocated  subgroups  can  impair  group 

functioning”,  Academy  of  management  Journal,  vol.  49, 
no. 4, pp. 679-92, Aug. 2006. 

4. P. Ralph, S. Baltes, G. Adisaputri, R. Torkar, V. Kovalenko, 
M Kalinowski, N. Novielli, S. Yoo, X. Devroey, X. Tan, and 
M.  Zhou,  “Pandemic  programming”,  Empirical  Software 
Engineering, vol. 25, no.6, pp. 4927-4961, 2020.  

5. D. Ford, M. A. Store, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, S. Jaffe, C., 
Maddila, J. L.. Butler, B. Houck and N. Nagappan. “A tale 
of  two  cities:  Software  developers  working  from  home 
during  the  COVID-19  pandemic”,  ACM  Transactions  on 
Software  Engineering  and  Methodology  (TOSEM),  Dec 
vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 1-37, Dec. 24, 2021. 

6. D. Smite, A. Tkalich, N. B. Moe, E. Papatheocharous,  E. 
Klotins, and M. P. Buvik,  (2022), “Changes in perceived 
productivity  of  software  engineers  during  COVID-19 

July 2022 

Psychological safety in remote work  

7 

Onsite Work in the officeOffice teamsAll always onsiteVirtual teamsAll always remoteRemoteWork from home, café, co-working space, etc.HybridA mix of remote workdays and workdays in the officeAbility to interact spontaneouslyAbility to stay focused for extended periodHighly spontaneous interaction, Low ability to focusLimited spontaneity of interaction, Highly focused workAligned daysMisaligned daysPeriodically spontaneous interaction among the few, Periodically focused workTeams with asynchronized office presenceHighly spontaneous interaction when onsiteHighly focused when remoteTeams with synchronized office presence 
 
 
 
 
pandemic: The voice of evidence,” J Syst Softw, vol. 186, 
no. 111197, 2022 

7. D. Russo, P. H. Hanel, S. Altnickel, and N. Van Berkel, “The 
daily  life  of  software  engineers  during  the  covid-19 
pandemic,” in IEEE/ACM Proc. 43rd ICSE-SEIP, May, 202, 
pp. 
Available: 
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumb
er=9401998  

364-373. 

[Online]. 

8.  D.  G.  Kolb,  A.  Caza,  and  P.  D.  Collins,  “States  of 
Connectivity:  New  Questions  and  New  Directions”, 
Organization Studies, vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 267-273, 2012, 
doi: 10.1177/0170840611431653 

9.  C.  Miller,  P.  Rodeghero,  M.  A.  Storey,  D.    Ford,  and  T. 
Zimmermann,  “How  Was  Your  Weekend?”  Software 
Development Teams Working From Home During COVID-
19, in IEEE/ACM Proc. 43rd ICSE, May, 2021, pp. 624-636. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9401956  
10. M. B. O'Leary and M. Mortensen, “Subgroups, imbalance, 
teams”, 
and 
Organization  science  vol.  21,  no.  1,  pp.  115-31,  Feb, 
2010. 

in  geographically  dispersed 

isolates 

11. M. L. Frazier, S. Fainshmidt, R. L. Klinger, A. Pezeshkan, 
and V. Vracheva, “Psychological Safety: A Meta-Analytic 
Review and Extension,” Personnel Psychology, vol. 70, no. 
1, pp. 113–165, 2017. 

12.  M.  Buvik,  and  A.  Tkalich,  “Psychological  Safety  in  Agile 
Software Development Teams: Work Design Antecedents 
and  Performance  Consequences”,  in  Proc.  of  the  55th 
HICSS,  April,  2022,  pp.  7330-7339.  [Online].  Available: 
https://scholarspace.manoa.hawaii.edu/server/api/core/bi
tstreams/7d96f53c-c1f0-4a80-bfac-
bc409cc37952/content  

13.  A.  Edmondson,  “Psychological  safety  and  learning 
behavior 
teams”,  Administrative  Science 
Quarterly,  vol.  44,  no.  2,  pp.  350-383.  1999.  doi: 
10.2307/2666999  

in  work 

pp. 

[Online]. 

677-686. 

14.  S.  t.  Iqbal,  and  E,  Horvitz,  “Disruption  and  recovery  of 
computing tasks: field study, analysis, and directions”,  in 
Proc. of SIGCHI Conf. Hum. Factors Comput. Syst., April, 
Available: 
2007, 
https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/1240624.1240730  
15. T. Sporsem and N. B. Moe, “Coordination Strategies When 
Working  from  Anywhere:  A  Case  Study  of  Two  Agile 
Teams”, in Proc. of 23rd International Conference on Agile 
(Copenhagen),  2022 
(XP), 
Software  Development 
Denmark,  Jun.  13–17,  2022,  pp.  52-61.  [Online]. 
Available:  https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-
3-031-08169-9_4  

8 

Psychological safety in remote work 

July 2022 

 
 
 
 
