Practitioner’s Perspective on Motivators of Agile in Global Software 
Development  

Muhammad Azeem Akbar1, Abeer Al-Sanad2, Saima Rafi3, Yuqing Wang4, Musaad Alzahrani5 

1Department of Software Engineering, LUT University, Lappeenranta, Finland 
2Imam Mohammad Ibn Saud Islamic University, Information Systems Department, Riyadh, 11432, Saudi Arabia.  
3University of Murcia, Department of Informatics and Systems, Murcia, 30100, Spain 
4M3S, Univeristy of Oulu, Finland.  
5Department of Computer Science, Albaha University; Albaha 65799, Saudi Arabia 

Corresponding Author: Muhammad Azeem Akbar (azeem.akbar@lut.fi) 

Abstract  
In modern software development world, experts are trying to provide the best solutions to their 
clients.  To  achieve  this,  the  organizations  opt  for  the  agile  software  development  process  as  it 
enables  them  to  develop  and  deliver  the  product  in-time  and  as  per  client’s  expectations. 
Consequently, in software engineering industry, the Global Software Development (GSD) is the 
most  widely  considering  software  development  paradigm  as  it  offers  significant  strategic  and 
business  gains.  Seeking  the  benefits  of  GSD,  the  European  software  engineering  organizations 
are outsourcing their development activities in developing countries. Considering the criticalities 
of  agile  adoption  in  GSD,  this  work  empirically  studies  the  motivators  that  could  positively 
influence the execution of agile-based GSD in European software industry. A quantitative survey 
was  conducted  and  data  from  139  practitioners  working  in  agile  and  GSD  based  projects  was 
collected. The collected  observations were further analyzed using  Smart-PLS (3.0). The results 
show that the identified motivators are important to consider by industry experts to successfully 
apply the agile practices in GSD context.  

Keywords: Agile, motivators, global software development, empirical study  

1. Introduction  
Global Software Development (GSD) is  carried out by teams of knowledge workers located in 
various  parts  of  the  globe  developing  commercially  viable  software  for  an  organization  [1]. 
These  knowledge  team  workers  communicate  and  coordinate  virtually,  and  carry  out  their 
activities  regarding  software  development  [1].  An  idea  of  software  development  through 
geographically distributed team members was given quite earlier than word GSD. For example, 
in early 1970, a technique known as “contract programming”[2] was used and different software 
development  companies  had  all  components  of  a  system  but  outsourced  to  third-party  for 
development.  The  majority  of  software  companies  in  the  west  (client)  begins  software 
development  outsources  to  vendor  companies  in  the  east  due  to  different  problems  such  as 
deficiency  time,  sources,  cost  of  development,  and  trained  workers  [3,  4].  Strategic  and 
economic advantages are main aspects to encourage software industries towards globalization [5-
7].  The  Standish  Group  surveyed  and  documented  that  20%  western  (client)  software 
development companies outsourced software projects to eastern (vendors) companies worldwide 
[5]. The key reasons behind the possible increase in software development outsourcing to eastern 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
countries  are  due  to  low  cost,  access  to  international  market,  availability  of  round  the  clock 
development time, better quality of products and skilled labour force etc [1, 6].  

Currently, in Europe the GSD trend is becoming more popular[3, 8, 9]. Studies showed that only 
in Europe, 21 countries have gained the rank of ideal countries for GSD, however; some other  
are  trying  to  inaugurate  and  start  GSD  [5].  Europe  could  provide  advantage  to  other  software 
development  firms  in  east  that  are  pursuing  fast  growth;    by  outsourcing  their  projects  due  to 
multiple reasons such as government support, developed infrastructure, economic incentives and 
collaboration  [3,  10].  However,  challenges  such  as  temporal,  socio-cultural  and  geographical 
distances are causing hurdles regarding adaptation agile in GSD [7, 10-12]. In addition to these 
challenges,  customer  satisfaction,  system  quality,  business  and  market  needs,  tight  project 
deadlines  and  frequent  feedback  [7,  13]  motivated  the  various  software  development 
organizations  to impose agile methods in field of GSD [5, 14, 15]. The integration of GSD and 
agile  methods  would  help  the  software  development  companies  towards  better  quality  product 
and speedy development [5].  

Agile software development (ASD) is a lightweight software development technique comprised 
of  a  set  of  methods  and  practices  that    are  quick,  easy  and  have  dynamic  change  under 
uncertainties,  time  and  pressure  [16].  The  dynamic  systems  development  method  (DSDM), 
SCRUM, lean, Kanban, XP (extreme programming) and FDD (feature driven development) are 
the agile frameworks and widely used in the world [17]. The manifesto of ASD depends on fast 
product  delivery,  instant  feedback  collaboration  of  customers,  dedicated  teamwork,  simplicity 
and dynamic changes according to requirement [16-18]. The main points of agile manifesto are 
developed by group of software development and professionals, which have understanding and 
knowledge about agile ideas [18, 19]. 

Although,  there  are  many  benefits  of  ASD  but  in  GSD  domain,  the  scaling  agile  methods  are 
challenging  and  could    cause  complications  for  development  activities  [11].  Along  with 
coordination,  proper  informal  communication  between  software  professionals  is  required  to 
control intense situation of agile process in GSD environment.  (Paasivaara and Lassenius [20], 
[21].  In  Europe,  the  differences  in  socio-cultural  values  and  standards  and  linguistic  barriers 
make  difficulties  in  scaling  agile  practices  [22].  Due  to  difference  in  cultural  norms  and 
language, there is less coordination and control and more chances of miscommunication. Studies 
showed  that  among  different  barriers,  language  is  the  main  barrier  in  agile  practices  [23].  In 
Europe, the  majority of customers are doing work in their primary language and/or English as a 
first  language  [14,  23].  Likewise,  communication  style  is  another  important  barrier  after 
language barrier. Most of the vendors  belonging to European country  communicate directly and 
in concise way, while in north peoples express or deliver their messages by using various stories 
and analogies [14, 15, 23].  

Thus, it is clear from above discussion that there are several risks that European GSD industry 
facing concerning to manage the agile activities as concepts simply depend on close coordination 
and  communication.  Therefore,  it  is  very  important  to  handle  or  manage  the  main  problems 
challenged  by  agile  team  members  during  performing  their  activities  in  GSD  domain  and 
connections with clients or organizations worldwide. Seeking the importance of successful agile 
execution in GSD context, this study empirically explores the motivator important to manage the 

 
 
 
 
agile  activities  in  GSD  context.  This  in-depth  study  will  serve  as  a  body  of  knowledge  to 
industry  practitioners  and  research  community  to  revise  or  develop  the  new  strategies  for 
successful execution of agile methodologies in GSD context.  

2. Literature Review and theoretical hypothesis  
2.1 Literature Review  
Different  frameworks and models have been  used in  large scale organizations  for  scaling agile 
methods. These models includes Disciplined Agile Delivery (DAD) [24], Agile Process Maturity 
Model  (APMM)  [25]  and  Scaled  Agile  Framework  (SAFe)  [26].  Although,  these    types  of 
models  are  used  in  larger  organizations  effectively  but  they  do  not  clearly  address  diverse 
domain of GSD projects [27, 28]. Paasivaara and Lassenius [20] shared the results of case study 
in  which  agile  transformation  was  used  in  large  organization.  They  highlighted  importance  of 
agile methods distributed globally and discussed the requirement of commonly used framework 
and its implementation in GSD to scale agile methods [29, 30]. In addition, they also highlighted 
the  deficiency  of  effective  management  strategies  that  might  be  undertaken  to  alter  the  agile 
methods in GSD situation. However, previous studies did not discuss in detail the agile methods’ 
scaling strategies because the execution of agile method is more challenging in GSD condition 
rather than collocated (single site) software development  [31-33]. Furthermore, modern studies 
have  also  not  concentrated  on  the  development  strategies  that  could  be  implemented  to  scale 
agile  method  in  Europe  GSD  industry  [14,  15,  34,  35].    We  have  identified  the  following 
motivators by reviewing the literature.  

2.1.1 Organizational Management 

Executive  body  support  (M1):  It  is  very  important  in  distributed  worksites  to  have  a  team 
member as a leader [36]. Leader of a team will ensure and give all the possible support to team 
members at worksite. The team members will update and communicate with each other working 
on  different  sites  of  project  and  will  ensure  that  all  project  progress  and  update  are  accurately 
provided for smooth running of project [36, 37].   
Hypothetical  statement:  based  on  the  above  discussion,  leadership  support  could  positively 
influence the execution of agile in GSD paradigm by software industries.    

Arrange social activities (M2): It is also important to initiate the social activities for helping and 
developing the agile scaling mind-set. The  teams can  share the facts and figures to identify new 
working  methods  [38, 39]. Agile attractive activities can bring motivation  in  team  members to 
adopt  agile  practices.  Social  media  activities  are  now  being  used  as  a  tool  for  developing  the 
relations among management, team members and customers [40, 41].  
Hypothetical statement: Literature shows the arrangements of social events play a positive role 
in the adoption of agile in GSD domain  

Communication  and  control  (M3):  Different  issues  of  communications  and  control  emerge 
during  scaling  agile  in  geographically  distributed  development  environment  [25,  42]. 
Organization,  harmonization  and  boundary  spanning  are  three  main  constituents  which 
considerably  affect  the  efficiency  of  communication  and  coordination  [25,  43].  Further,  the 
collaboration  of  customer  with  agile  team  is    important  and  also  mentioned  in  agile  manifesto 
[41].  Collaborative    culture  can  develop  understanding  between  teams,  continuous  integration 

 
 
 
 
 
and  monitoring,  identification  of  main  barriers  and  selection  of  suitable  collaboration  tools  for 
distributed teams [43, 44]. 
Hypothetical  statement:  according  to  the  literature,  effective  communication  and  control  is  an 
important element to make the agile successful in GSD context.  

Knowledge acquisition (M4): knowledge awareness in team members is  important during agile 
practice because that will helps to  scale agile methods appropriately in distributed environment 
[45].  Team  members  commonly  follow  the  non-agile  practices  due  to  deficiency  of  coaching 
classes, trainings and knowledge about new practices  [46]. Thus, it is very essential to involve 
the agile teams in external training sessions and workshops events to improve the knowledge and 
understanding.  
Hypothetical  statement:  knowledge  acquisition  positively  influences  the  software  industries  to 
successfully implement the agile in GSD.  

Hypothesis  (H1):    the  organizational  management  could  significantly  contribute  to  make  the 
agile successful in GSD context.   

2.1.2 Team 
Agile champions and change agents (M5): They are main catalytic agents that develop changes 
between  the  teams  and  management  [47].  They  are  highly  significant  for  scaling  the  agile 
methods on larger scale and they could change culture of organizations. There should be strong 
considerations and good decisions to scale agile in GSD domain [48]. The agile scaling should 
develop ripple which may not go in hands of few stakeholders; thus, it is duty of agile agents or 
champions to speculate and maintain supportive environment with top management.  
Hypothetical statement: Software development  organizations need to focus on  agile champions 
and change agents for successful adoption GSD context.  

Customer  Involvement  (M6):  The  participation  of  customers  greatly  affects  agile  scaling 
procedure [38]. Active customers cooperation and risk tolerance can enhance ability of the teams 
in  agile  transformation  [39].  Customers  participates  in  different  activities  and  should  help  the 
agile teams with their feedbacks [39]. Both the customers and agile team members come together 
and play active role for success of agile scaling process.  
Hypothetical  statement:  actively  participation  of  customer  could  play  a  positive  role  in  the 
adoption of agile in GSD context.  

Creating  self-organizing  teams  (M7):  Suitable  architecture,  products  design  and  requirement 
come  due  to  self-organising  team  [19],  because    members  of  a  team  take  part  the  important 
responsibilities  of  project  without  external  effects  [47].  The  team  members  are  controlled  by 
manager of the team, and they internally choose the duties and responsibilities during working 
on  projects.  In  self-organising  development,  motivation,  collaboration,  trust,  responsibility, 
teamwork  and  ownership  [49]  are  the  important  principles  that  increase  the  success  of  team, 
better product delivery along with customer gratification. 
Hypothetical  statement:  according  to  the  literature,  developing  self-organizing  teams  plays  an 
important role for adopting agile in GSD.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
Training  and  coaching  (M8):  In  GSD  domain,  scaling  of  agile  methods  brings  considerable 
transformation  in  organizational  settings  [50]. Training of teams  significantly enhances scaling 
abilities  by  encouraging  motivation  of  agile  team.  It  enables  the  people  more  optimistic, 
confident  and increase their knowledge about  new culture and working  environment  [51]. Non 
availability  of  training  and  coaching  may  result  in  improper  scaling  process  through  agile 
techniques.  Agile  coach  brings  the  focus  more  towards  agile  principles  rather  than  tools.  The 
agile  practices  either  the  bottom-up  or  top-down  directions  are  important.  The  management  of 
organization  involves  in  both    the  situations  and  offer  education  or  training  facilities  to  agile 
teams at all levels from executives member to common agile team member [49, 51]. As skilled 
human resources have a significant importance in scaling agile methods in GSD domain. Higher 
authority (management) and agile team members should possess the professional qualifications 
and experiences in agile or related subjects [46]. They also possess capability of GSD and agile 
project that would help them to understand the issues occur during scaling of agile and skillful 
and experienced experts could handle the these problems [38].  
Hypothetical statement: literature indicated the training and coaching as an important aspect to 
make the agile successful in GSD context.  

Continuous  learning  environment  (M9):  Learning  environment  could  attain  creativeness, 
capability  and  enhance  the  knowledge  of  workforce  and  customers  working  in  organizations 
[40].  Organizations  could  arrange  the  continuous  learning  atmosphere  for  agile  revolution  by 
bearing in mind the most important points as:  

•  The members of team at bottom and top level must seek and prepare themselves for the 
improvement  and  transformation  of  organization  according  to  continuous  changes 
occurring in the world. 

•  The  management  of  organization  should  encourage  the  workers  and  staff  of  the 

organization to develop and explore new ideas for future value addition. 

•  Enterprise  must  give  the  attention  on  regular  improvements  in  agile  practices  and 

revolutionary methods. 

Hypothetical statement: Based on the literature discussion, continuous learning environment is 
important for agile adoption in GSD context.  

Hypothesis  (H2):    effective  team  organization  could  positively  impact  the  execution  of  agile 
practices in GSD context. 

2.1.3 Technology 
Engineering excellence (M10): sustainable engineering culture is essential to scale agile methods 
because  inadequate  engineering  practices  could  considerably  affect  the  performance  and 
productivity of team and outcomes in poor quality of products and their delivery [41]. Low and 
interrupted products delivery can cause technical obligations that need to be resolved otherwise 
product  quality  will  be  affected  significantly  [41].  It  is  responsibility  of  GSD  organizations  to 
assure  the  engineering  excellence  by  developing  DevOps  culture,  organizing  tests,  cooperation 
with  each  other  and  among  the  distributed  sites,  and  visually  observe  situation  to  monitor 
products quality and progress[52, 53] .  
Hypothetical statement:  Engineering  excellence is an important factor  for software industry to 
successful implement the agile in GSD context.   

 
 
 
 
Tools and infrastructure (M11): There is a need of investment on latest infrastructure and tools 
used  in  GSD.  The  related  organizations  should  invest  in  this  regard  for  proper  agile  scaling 
process. Complexity increases in software development processes when the agile team members 
do  the  development  activities  across  their  geographic  locations  [47].  The  modern  software 
related to  infrastructure  and engineering tools such as cloud  native platform, strong integration 
and automatic testing process are main elements of agile scaling. It is essential to get advanced 
tools and techniques to improve and enhance the agile practices worldwide [54].  
Hypothetical  statement:  is  an  important  factor  for  the  implementation  of  agile  in  GSD  by 
software development organizations.  

Maturity model for agile transformation (M12):  It is still a challengeable task for scaling agile 
and  its  integration  in  conventional  GSD  domain.  The  prevailing  frameworks  like  SAFe,  DAD 
and Large-scale Scrum (LeSS) etc. are prepared for large scale agile. But well-structured model 
with specific puppetries that can control agile practices in GSD domain is the basic need of the 
hour  [55,  56].  GSD  and  large-scale  organizations  are  two  different  domains,  and  it  is  not 
necessary that large scale organization should be distributed worldwide. This problem can only 
solved applying a particular agile maturity model, which can measure scaling competencies of a 
GSD and give suitable development practices [56].  
Hypothetical  statement:  according  to  literature,  the  consideration  of  maturity  model  for  agile 
transformation is important in GSD context.  

Hypothesis (H3): intime and appropriate technology consideration could play a positive role for 
agile adoption in GSD context.   

2.1.4 Process 
Communities  of  practice  (CoP)(M13):  An    organized  groups  of  people  who  show  similar 
interests to specific business or technical domain [41, 46]. They cooperate and share information 
with each other regularly to enhance their skills to overcome challenges in specific domain. CoP 
are common for the ScrumMaster (SM), DevOps and agile testing [48]. The main individuals in 
CoP offer frameworks and assistance for agile team members to sustain the regularity across the 
team members [46]. 
Hypothetical  statement:  Communities  of  practices  are  important  for  software  development 
organizations to make the agile successful in GSD context 

Selecting and customising the agile approach (M14): Various agile methods are working under 
diverse geographical distributed environments however, each team possess its specific characters 
and needs particular agile technique [47]. For example, Kanban, Scrum and XP approaches are 
used by  particular teams but  not  by all teams. Thus, it is  essential to  modify agile methods by 
following  environment  of  organization  that  might  need  particular  development  and  procedures 
[47]. 
Hypothetical  statement:  literature  elaborated  that  the  selection  and  customization  of  could 
contributed towards the adoption of agile in GSD. 

Workflow transparency (WT) (M15): In agile environment, transparency of work  shows positive 
activities and deep understanding of project [42, 57]. WT makes easy to monitor the progress of 
projects including running tasks, future projects and their time frames, and barriers that affect the 

 
 
 
 
 
agile  teams  during  working  particular  activities  [43,  50].  WT  can  help  to  control  agile  team 
effectively.  
Hypothetical statement: researcher indicating the workflow transparency as an important factor 
for implementing agile in GSD.  

Instant feedback (M16): Agile is a collaborative and consistent approach to satiate stakeholders 
and  customers  via  constant  supply  of  useful  software  systems.  For  more  improvement  in  agile 
practices, continuous and collaborative feedback is  essential, and team should give attention  to 
feedbacks  by  customers  [58].  Regular  feedback  between  agile  teams  distributed  through  the 
world and customers will encourage practitioners to emphasis on suitable system features [59]. 
Furthermore, it will result in an easy transformation supervision process, particularly when new 
requirements are needed by clients. 
Hypothetical  statement:  literature  shows  that  the  instant  feedback  plays  an  important  role  to 
make the agile successful in GSD. 

Create a single and via product backlog (M17): Backlog comprise of all of the ideas and work 
items that should be considered in product [60]. In backlog, features or items are characterized 
and  prioritized  depending  on  their  importance  [39,  61].  Each  component  of  backlog  is  labeled 
with a particular code number. It is very important factor when agile team performs its working 
activities from different sites across the globe. It gives outlines of all the elements of product and 
its characters to product customers and agile team as well [61]. The idea is to start with minimum 
viable    that    emphasizes  the  impact  of  learning  on  new  product  development  [62].  The  main 
advantage  of    minimum  viable  product  is  to  understands  about  interest  of  customers  in  the 
products  by  observing  the  customer  feedback  [47,  63].  It  is  an  iteration  progression  which 
supports  products  improvement  works  by  decreasing  gap  between  agile  teams  and  business 
shareholders [62]. 
Hypothetical statement: Create a single and via product backlog is important to make the agile 
successful in GSD context.  

Planning  and  usage  of  large-scale  agile  framework  (M18):  There  are  different  types  of  agile 
scale  frameworks  such  as  DAD  and  SAFe.  The  important  thing  is  choose  the  most  suited 
framework,  which  could  fulfill  the  needs  of  an  organization  [64].  Each  framework  has 
advantages and disadvantages and there is not a single one, which might have all characters and 
fit  organization.  Thus,  it  is  essential  to  select  the  suitable  framework  that  increase  the  team 
communication, performance, production of quality end products with suitable cost [51, 60]. The 
main  objective  of  organization  can  be  achieved  if  the  organization  efficiently  plan  the  scaling 
approach  [65,  66].  In  any  framework,  the  main  indicators  such  as  definite  roles  and 
responsibilities,  balance  in  bottom  up  and  top  down  coordination,  customer  satisfaction  and 
adaptation of new practices should be present [39, 51]. 

Hypothetical statement: The use of large-scale agile framework is important to consider for the 
successful adoption of agile in GSD context.   

Hypothesis (H4): to successfully manage the agile in GSD, the consideration of an appropriate 
process is important.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
2.2 Theoretical basis for the proposed framework 
To  develop  the  theoretical  framework  for  this  research,  we  used  the  theory  of  critical  success 
factors  (CSFs)  [67].  A  key  success  factor  is  a  causal  relationship.  It  expresses  a  relationship 
between  the  competitive  advantage  a  business  enjoys  in  a  market,  in  terms  of  perceived  value 
and  relative  costs,  and  the  causes  of  that  competitive  advantage,  in  terms  of  certain  skills  and 
resources. 

The idea that there are a few factors which are decisive for the success of the organization, and 
that  these  factors  can  be  ascertained,  was  first  introduced  by  Daniel  [68]  and  later  mainly 
elaborated  by  Rockart  [69];  Bullen  and  Rockart  [70]  in  the  context  of  designing  management 
information  systems.  Finding  that  top  management  rarely  used  management  information 
systems, they argued that such systems must be structured according to the needs of the system.  

In  CSFs  theory  the  concept  in  the  management  information  systems  and  strategy  literature  is 
traced,  and  a  new  view  is  presented,  which  defines  key  success  factors  as  skills  and  resources 
with high leverage on customer perceived value and relative costs of a business. The key success 
factors  are  distinguished  from  core,  slack,  and  auxiliary  skills  and  resources.  Perceived  are 
distinguished  from  actual  key  success  factors,  and  it  is  argued  that  empirical  research  on  key 
success factors should address both.  The CSF theory define the success factors as:  

•  Key  success  factor  is  a  skill  or  resource  of  the  software  development  process;  it  is  always 
actionable. 
•  Key  success  factors  are  organization  specific,  but  they  transcend  strategic  groups  in  a 
development process. 
• Key success  factors present the core areas of an organization. This implies that there may be 
markets where there are no key success factors, but only many small contributors to success. 
• Key success  factors imply  a causal  relationship between a skill/resource and perceived value 
and/or relative cost. They are hence not directly related to performance measures like  return of 
investment.  This  may  be  an  advantage,  since  the  relationship  between  perceived  value/relative 
cost  and  return  of  investment  may  be  intricate,  and  perceived  value/relative  costs  are  better 
indicators of competitive advantage. 

In this study, we considering the concept define by theory of Motivators and develop the research 
framework (Figure 1, Table 1).  

 
 
 
 
Figure 1: proposed research framework 

Table 1: Proposed hypothesis  

Categories 
Organizational Management:  
(The organizational management could 
significantly contribute to make the agile 
successful in GSD context) 

Team:  (effective  team  organization  could 
positively  impact  the  execution  of  agile 
practices in GSD context) 

Technology: (intime and appropriate 
technology consideration could play a 
positive role for agile adoption in GSD 
context) 

H1 

H2 

H3 

H4 

Process: (to successfully manage the agile 
in GSD, the consideration of an 
appropriate process is important) 

Sub-categories (Motivators)  
Executive body support (M1) 
Conduct social activities(M2) 
Communication and control(M3)  
Knowledge acquisition (M4) 
Agile champions and change agents (M5) 
Customer Involvement (M6) 
Creating self-organizing teams (M7) 
Training and education (M8) 
Continuous learning environment (M9) 
Engineering excellence (M10) 
Tools and infrastructure (M11) 
Maturity model for agile transformation 
(M12) 
Communities of practice (CoP) (M13) 
Selecting and customizing the agile 
approach (M14) 
Workflow transparency (WT) (M15) 
Instant feedback (M16) 
Create a single and via product backlog 
(M17) 
Planning and Usage of large-scale agile 
framework (M18) 

 
 
 
 
3 Research Methodology 
Data will be collected and analysed based on the literature survey and industrial empirical study 
conducted with the agile practitioners working in  Europe GSD industry. By nature, the present 
study is quantitative in nature. To collect the empirical data from the industrial practitioners, the 
questionnaire  survey  approach  was  adopted.  The  data  was  collected  from  the  practitioners 
working  in  European  GSD  organizations.  For  data  collection  process,  the  used  steps  are 
discussed in the sub-sequent sections:  

3.1 Sampling 
For  data  collection,  we  have  approached  the  13  European  software  development  organizations 
working in the context of GSD. In approached software development organizations, around 550 
practitioners are directly dealing with agile in GSD. All the participants were approach for data 
collection purpose via invitation letter. Before going to collect the data, we developed the survey 
instrument  based  on  the  motivators  reported  in  the  literature  (section  2).  The  developed 
questionnaire  was  structured  in  four  different  sections.  Where’s  first  section  contains  the 
questions related to the bibliography of survey participants. Second section contain the details of 
participants related organization. Third section was based on the identified motivators. To assess 
the motivators, five scale Likert program (strongly agree to strongly disagree) was used. The last 
and forth section was open-ended which allows the practitioners to add their additional remarks 
in the questionnaire. For data collection process, we adopted simple random sampling technique. 
The survey instrument and the data collection process were hosted on Google Form.       
For the collection of appropriate data, the understanding of survey instrument is important. Thus, 
before  starting  the  data  collection  process,  we  done  a  pilot  study  with  experts.  The  initial 
developed questionnaire was sent to five experts working in software development organizations. 
They highlighted some important  modification. For example, they  suggest  presenting variables 
of section 3 in tabular form. They also suggest to add some questions in section 2 to get the size 
of organizations. Considering all the suggestions, we update the questionnaire, and the updated 
form of questionnaire was used for data collection.     

The data collection process was performed during December 2021 to March 2022. During data 
collection  process,  we  get  responses  from  153  practitioners.  The  received  responses  were 
manually  reviewed  and  cleaned  the  data  set  by  deleting  the  incomplete  responses.  During 
cleaning,  we  also  take  care  of  robot  answers  (e.g.,  a  person  who  gave  same  answers  for  all 
survey questions), but we did not find any robot answer.  However, we found some incomplete 
responses and by removing the incomplete responses, 139 complete responses were considered 
for final analysis.   

3.2 Survey data analysis 
Structural  Equation  Modeling  (SEM)  approach  of  Partial  Least  Square  (PLS)[71]  was  used  to 
analyze  the  collected  responses  concerning  to  achieve  the  subject  of  this  study.  Therefore,  to 
evaluate the implication of the developed theoretical model and hypothesis from H1 to H4, the 
analysis work is  divided into three steps. As a  first  step, we performed the normal  distribution 
and  parametric  statistical  tests  were  executed.  In  this  step,  we  used  the  parametric  statistical 
method, and the Pearson correlation of coefficient was determined for tests with a one-tailed t-
test for the proposed hypothesis i.e., H1 to H4.  

 
 
 
 
The PLS is a more effective approach to analyses the data compared with traditional techniques 
e.g., regression. The PLS, like other SEM techniques, enables the researchers to simultaneously 
model the relationship between multiple independent and dependent variables and respond to the 
research  questions  in  single,  systematic,  and  comprehensive  analysis  [89].  In  addition,  PLS  is 
appropriate for this research work as it gives the structural model that is complicated to analyze a 
large  set  of  relationships  among  variables  [72,  73].  Various  other  conducted  studies  in  the 
domain of software engineering use the same technique [74-77].  

4. Results and discussions  
This  research  work  aims  to  explore  the  factors  that  could  positively  influence  the  European 
software  development  organizations  to  successfully  implement  the  agile  practices  in  GSD 
context. To come-up with study objectives, we identified the 18 motivators that are important for 
agile  adoption  in  GSD  reported  in  literature.  Based  on  the  literature  findings,  we  developed  a 
research model (hypothetical framework, Figure 1). The proposed hypothetical framework shows 
the  positive  effect  of  identified  motivators  on  software  development  organizations  for  agile 
adoption  in  GSD  context.  To  check  the  applicability  of  identified  motivators  in  European 
software  development  organizations,  we  have  visited  13  organizations  for  getting  the  opinions 
and  perceptions  of  practitioners.  Through,  questionnaire,  we  get  139  complete  responses  form 
practitioners. Next, we used the Structural Equation Modeling approach of Partial Least Square 
(PLS)  for  data  analysis.  The  PLS  analysis  were  performed  in  both  form,  measurement  model 
evaluation  and  structural  model  evaluation  [78].  In  structural  model  analysis,  significance 
structure  path,  coefficient  of  determination  (R2),  and  estimate  one  of  path  coefficients  were 
employed. 

4.1 Measurement model evaluation 

4.1.1 Demographic profile 
To  get  the  appropriate  insight  of  the  practitioners,  the  targeting  of  appropriate  population  is 
important.  Thus,  in  this  study,  we  have  collected  data  from  European  software  development 
organizations working in the context of GSD. For data collection, we have developed the survey 
questionnaire,  that  was  sent  to  153  practitioners.  During  data  collection  process,  we  only 
received  139  complete  responses.  The  majority  of  the  received  responses  are  from  Finland, 
Norway and Spain, and Germany. The detailed bibliographic analysis of respondents is presented 
in  Figure  2,  that  shows  the  appropriability  of  the  collected  data  concerning  to  the  objective  of 
this study.    

Finstad et al.[79] underlined that the opinions of  experts varied with respect to the designation 
of participants. Niazi et al.[80] highlighted that a survey participates could only give appropriate 
response if they deal with the situation or problem frequently. According to bibliographic data, 
majority  of  the  respondents  were  either  software  developers  or  requirements  engineers  (Figure 
2).  In  addition,  we  checked  the  bibliographic  data  concerning  to  the  organizations  size  of  the 
survey respondents. The frequency shows that out of 139 responses, majority of the respondents 
41% are from medium size organizations. Furthermore, 35% were from small organizations and 
24% were from large scale organizations.  
The bibliographic data was also analyzed concerning to determine the experiences of the survey 
participants. The results are presented in Figure 2, the respondents experience ranged between 5 

 
 
 
 
to  25  years.  By  calculating  the  mean  and  medium  (6.5  and  6  and  respectively),  shows  a  good 
experience pool of participants. Similarly, out of 139 participants 76% were male and 24% were 
female,  and  this  shows  that  male  community  still  dominating  in  software  development 
organizations  

Figure 2: Demographics of survey participants 

4.1.2 Frequency analysis   
The respondents’ opinions were collected using the 5-point Likert scale from strongly disagree to 
strongly agree. The collected responses were further classified as positive, negative, and neutral. 
Positive  category  contains  the  information  about  the  survey  Participants  who  are  agree  as  the 
enlisted  motivators  against  each  category  has  positive  influence  on  agile  in  GSD  context.  The 
result of negative category shows those respondents who are not agree with the identified factors 
as  motivator  for  agile  in  GSD  context.  Moreover,  the  result  of  neutral  category  shows  the 
respondents frequency who are not sure about the impact of motivator on agile in GSD context.   

The frequency-based  analysis against the motivators of each  category  is  presented in  Figure 3. 
According to the frequency analysis highest frequency of responses of each category is positive 
(strongly  agree  and  agree).  This  elaborated  that  majority  of  the  respondents  agree  as  the 
identified  motivators  are  important  for  the  successful  execution  of  agile  practices  in  GSD 
domain.  The  results  render  that  to  make  the  agile  practices  successful,  the  organizational 
practitioners  need  to  consider  the  highlighted  motivators.  Figure  3  shows  M10  (Engineering 
excellence), M12 (Maturity model for agile transformation), M2 (Conduct social activities), M5 
(Agile champions and change agents, and M9 (Continuous learning environment) are the highest 
score motivators reported by experts for successful agile adoption in GSD context.  
Thus, by considering the highest frequency of responses in positive category, we performed the 
further analysis.  

 
 
 
 
Figure 3: frequency of survey responses 

4.1.3 Correlation among core process areas 
We  studieded  the  correlation  among  organizational  mangment,  team,  technology  and  process 
areas  in  order  to  check  the  relationship  between  the  core  areas  of  GSD  process  improvement.  
We  used  the  Spearman  correlation  approch  as  it  is  an  effective  techinique  to  calculate  the 
strength of both linear and non-linear association among more than one variable [81].  

The  determined  Spearman  correlatoin  results  indicated  in  Figure  4  and  the  results  renders  the 
significnt positive correlation among all organizational mangment, team, technology and process 
areas. Besides, we also noted a slight negative correlation (rs=-0.11) between team and process 
areas. This shows that team and process are loosly coupled but in rest of the combinaitons all the 
process ares are tightly coupled. To summarize, the correlation results indicated that to make the 
agile practicss sucessful in GSD, there is a need to close collabortaion among the organizational 
mangment, team, technology and process areas, instead of two areas i.e., team and process.    

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: correlation among GSD process improvement areas 

4.1.4 Data normality 
We  used  Skewness  and  Kurtosis  test  to  determine  the  data  normality.  Determined  results  of 
skewness and kurtosis, shows approximately normal distribution of the collected data. According 
to George and Mallery [82], the values ranging from 1 to -1 and 2 to -2, indicates the normal and 
satisfactory data, respectively.      

4.1.5 Internal consistency 
To determine the internal consistency, we used the Cronbach’s Alpha and Composite reliability 
test. According to the results, all the variables (M1 to M18, section 2, Figure 1) of this research 
work are consistent. According to Henseler et al.[83], the value 0.70 or above is considered as 
satisfactory  internal  consistency.  To  determine  the  internal  consistency,  all  the  variables  were 
considered in personality traits scale.  

Table 6: Reliability Statistics 
Variables 

Cronbach’s Alpha 

Organizational 
Management   
Team 
Technology   
Process    

0.788 

0.856 
0.897 
0.801 

Composite 
Reliability 
0.835 

Original No. of 
Items 
4 

Final No. of 
Items 
4 

0.862 
0.826 
0.821 

5 
3 
6 

5 
3 
6 

4.1.6 Indicator reliability 
The  outer  loading  scheme  was  used  to  check  the  indicator  reliability  and  analyzed  results  are 
given in Table 7. If the calculated value 0.70≥, it shows the outer loading satisfactory [83]. The 
determined results given in Table 7, shows satisfactory concerning to indicator reliability testing. 
Table 7: Indicator Reliability through Outer Loadings 

Organizational 

Management   

0.815 

M1 

Team 

Technology   

Process 

Agile in GSD   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.817 
0.727 
0.711 

0.845 
0.863 
0.921 
0.849 
0.866 

M2 
M3 
M4 
M5 
M6 
M7 
M8 
M9 
M10 
M11 
M12 
M13 
M14 
M15 
M16 
M17 
M18 
Organizational 
Management  
Team  
Technology  
Process  

0.874 
0.831 
0.928 

0.737 
0.715 
0.711 
0.812 
0.793 
0.865 

0.871 

0.836 
0.869 
0.847 

4.1.7 Multicollinearity 
The  multicollinearity  between  more  than  one  variable  are  calculated  using  regression  equation 
and  it  is  elaborated  using  VIA  values.  The  value  of  VIA  10≥,  shows  the  multicollinearity 
issue[84]. According to the calculated VIF values presented in Table 8.   

Independent Variables 
Organizational Management  
Team 
Technology  
Process  

Table 8: Multicollinearity Values 
Agile in GSD Intention  
3.667 
2.791 
2.577 
3.247 

Agile success in GSD 

1.000 

4.1.8 Validity analysis 
The convergent and discriminate validity analysis were used to determine the data validity. The 
average variance extracted (AVE) was used to calculated the convergent validity values; where’s 
the  AVE>0.5  considered  as  satisfactory  [83].  The  determined  results  given  in  Table  9,  which 
indicates that all the variables attain the satisfactory values for convergent validity.  

Table 9: AVE Values variables 

Variable 
Organizational Management  
Team 
Techonology  
Process  

AVE 
0.679 
0.781 
0.741 
0.767 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We  further  performed  the  discrimination  validity  test  using  the  Forner-Lorcker  criterion  PLS, 
and the results are presented in Table 10.  According to Forner-Lorcker [85], If the square root 
AVE of a variable is greater compared with correlation of the variables, renders the acceptable 
discriminant validity of the data set [83, 86]. 

The  results  presented  in  Table  10  shows  the  satisfactory  discrimination  validity  value  for  all 
variables.  The  square  roots  of  the  corresponding  variables  are  shown  by  the  diagonal  value  in 
green  shape,  and  the  value  below  the  square  root  represents  the  correlation  between  variables. 
The  diagonal  values  should  be  greater  than  the  values  below  the  diagonal  values,  in  layman's 
terms.  

Table 10: Fornell-Larcker Criterion for Discriminant Validity 

Organizational Management (P1) 
Team (P2) 
Technology (P3) 
Process (P4) 

P1 
0.757 
0.796 
0.872 
0.719 

P2 
- 
0.768 
0.753 
0.768 

P3 
- 
- 
0.747 
0.852 

P4 
- 
- 
- 
0.736 

4.1.9 Model fitness 
At first step, PLS offers  SRMR, NFI, and rms_Theta test to check the  model fitness. Table 11 
displays the determined findings for these models. PLS's Standard Root Mean Square (SRMR) 
based  on  bootstrap  is  equivalent  to  other  approaches'  chi-square  [87,  88].  In  SRMR,  a  value 
greater than 0.1 causes a difficulty with model fitness  [87]. Based on the data in Table 11, the 
determined value of SRMR is  less than 0.1, indicating that the suggested model is  fit. It's also 
worth noting that the NFI is higher than 0.50 and closer to 1, implying that the proposed model is 
a strong fit. We also saw that the value of rms Theta is closer to 0, indicating that the model is in 
good shape. 

Table 11: Model Fitness 

SRMR 
NFI 
Rms_Theta 

Saturated Model 
0.076 
0.583 
0.189 

Estimated Model 
0.078 
0.574 

4.2 Structural model evaluation 
At second step of PLS analysis, the proposed hypotheses were tested to check their implication 
on study objective. We used the bootstrapping method to determine the degree, significance (P 
Values and T-statistics) and R2 evaluations of the structural model [87]. If the determined value 
of T-statistics is greater than 1.96. (at significance level 5%) or 1.65 (significance level 10%), it 
is  considered  significant.  In  subsequent  sections,  we  analyzed  each  relationship  using  the 
parameters estimates (beta values) and T- statistics. The structural model evaluation results are 
presented in Table 13. The results of causal structural model are presented in Figure 4.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Structural model evaluation 

4.2.1 Organizational management and agile success in European GSD industry 
The  results  presented  in  Table  12  shows  organizational  management  is  an  important  area  to 
consider  concerning  to  make  the  agile  successful  in  GSD  context  in  European  software 
development  industries  (P-Value:  0.000;  T-value:  4.160),  We  further  noted  the  positive 
relationship  between  the  motivators  of  organizational  category  (Beta  value:  0.  0.234).  To 
summarize,  The  HI  is  accepted,  and  this  renders  that  the  consideration  of  motivators  of 
organizational  management  category is  important  to  make the  agile successful in  GSD context 
by software industry.  

4.2.2 Team and agile success in GSD by European industry 
The analyzed results (P-Value: 0.000; T-value: 18.054), Table 12 shows a positive relationship 
among the team category and agile success in GSD in European industry. The beta values 0.689 
present the positive relationship between variables with team category.  Therefore, according to 
the results, the H2 is supported by the opinions collected from real-world practitioners.  

4.2.3 Technology and agile success in GSD by European industry 
The calculated results  (P-Value: 0.000; T-value:  4.046) given in Table 12, indicated the strong 
positive relationship between technology and agile success in GSD. The calculated Beta results 
(0.472) present a significant positive relationship between the identified motivator of technology 
category. According to the results, H3 is accepted. Finally, the results shows that technology is 
an important  area that need to  be consider for the successful agile  adopting in  GSD context  in 
Finish industries.  

4.2.4 Process and agile success in GSD by European industry  
The  results  show  the  acceptance  of  H4.  This  indicated  that  there  is  a  positive  relationship 
between  process  areas  and  agile  success  in  GSD.  In  additions,  the  Beta  value=0.381,  T-

 
 
 
 
 
Value=7.437, P-value=0.000); indicated the strong positive relationship between the motivators 
and process category, and the process category significantly contribute to make the agile success 
in GSD in European industry.   

Table 12: Bootstrap Results for Causal Structural Model 

Organizational Management → Agile-
GSD  
Team → Agile-GSD 
Technology → Agile-GSD 
Process → Agile-GSD 

Parameter 
Estimate 
0.234 

Sample 
Mean 
0.238 

Standard 
Deviation 
0.062 

T 
Statistics 
4.160 

P 
Values 
0.000 

0.689 
0.472 
0.381 

0.789 
0.268 
0.487 

0.039 
0.076 
0.061 

18.054 
4.046 
7.437 

0.000 
0.000 
0.000 

4.2.5 Coefficient of determination for the endogenous latent variables 
We calculated the coefficient of determination (R2) to analyze the varied effects that independent 
factors had on the dependent variable, and the results are provided in Table 13.  The R2 values 
between  exogenous  variables  (organizational  management,  team,  technology,  and  process)  and 
the  endogenous  variable  (agile  success  in  GSD  in  European  industry)  are  significant  and 
substantial, with R2=0.785 and T=27.621. 

This  means  that  the  successful  accomplishment  of  organizational  management,  team, 
technology,  and  process  in  European  software  development  industry  account  for  a  large  (78.5 
percent) for agile success in GSD. Senapathi and Srinivasan [74] stated that if the R2 ≥ 0.75 is 
measured substantial. 

Table 13: R2 value for endogenous latent variables. 

Original Sa 

Agile-GSD 

0.785 

N 

0.800 

SD 

0.024 

T Stat 

27.621 

P Val 

0.000 

5. Discussion   

5.1 Organizations management and agile success in GSD 
Hypothesis  (H1):  (The  organizational  management  could  significantly  contribute  to  make  the 
agile successful in GSD context) 

According  to  the  results,  H1  is  accepted  as  industry  experts  reported  that  the  identified 
motivators against organizational management category are important for scaling agile process in 
GSD  context.  Senior  agile  leaders  play  an  important  role  in  shaping  the  agile  culture,  the 
collocated  development  mindset,  and  behaviors  to  GSD  context;  as  it  is  critical  for  top 
management  to  oversee  and  make  the  frequent  communication  possible  with  overseas  teams; 
considering multiple development sites, levels, and different time-zones [89]. 

Identifying communication gaps and resolving conflicts among overseas teams via agile lenses, 
there are some good ways for sensible senior management to address the existing organizational 
pain points[90]. The GSD management of an organization needs to focus on creating the synergy 
of teams, and improving effectiveness doing the right things, and solving the business problems. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It  could  have  potential  conflicts  between  how  organizational  management  perceive  agile  and 
how  the  overseas  development  team  understands  it  because  they  are  often  in  the  different, 
culture, time-zone, language, and position to look at the things from different angles [91].  

The  development  overseas  teams  are  more  efficiency  driven  or  detail  oriented,  and  the 
management team is more strategic driven, and principle focused [92]. In fact, the problem the 
overseas  teams  facing  may  not  be  the  problem  for  a  top  management,  similarly  the  risks  top 
management is handling may not be the most important one for the teams [92]. For example, the 
goals for top organizational management might be to ensure that there is a consistent way for the 
business  to  measure  the  efficacy  of  communication  amongst  and  between  overseas  teams. 
Consistency could  be more important  to  the organization than efficiency;  if that's the case, the 
most  efficient  solution  for  two  GSD  teams  may  not  be  the  right  one.  Therefore,  mutual 
understanding,  frequent  and  two-way  communication  are  important  to  build  trust  between 
organizational management and overseas GSD teams.  

5.2 Team and agile success in GSD 
Hypothesis  (H2):  (effective  team  organization  could  positively  impact  the  execution  of  agile 
practices in GSD context) 

The statistical results show the acceptance of H2, and this renders the effective overseas teams’ 
organizations have positive influence on the scaling execution of agile in GSD context.  

Agile software  development  methodology  in  GSD  context  needs overseas  agile  minded  teams. 
The  teams  that  think  differently  and  work  in  ways  that  support  responsive  delivery. 
An agile mindset,  and  a  set  of  shared  values,  principles,  and  often agile tools,  help Agile teams 
succeed[93]. 

Agile minded GSD team refers to a cross-functional group of people that is self-contained to the 
point  that  the  people  in  the  group  can  deliver  the  product  (or  the  next  iteration  of  it)  without 
requesting  to  draw  on  skills  outside  the  group.  Li  and  Alexander  [94]  indicated  that  the 
agile teams  aren’t  solely  developer  resources,  they  are  not  a  matrix  team  either.  Furthermore, 
the GSD based agile overseas teams are dedicated groups of people who do not move between 
products or teams just because there’s a demand in a different area of the business on the running 
project. Therefore, they become a close-knit and trusted group of colleagues, to deliver product 
on time. Each overseas group of team members working on a project is treated as a whole team, 
where’s they don’t need anyone or anything else to get things done. Anita et al.[95] highlighted 
the  importance  of  agile  overseas  team  management.    For  example,  if  an  organization  is  using 
Scrum,  then,  the  Scrum  master  should  be  educated  with  GSD  ethics,  manage  time  zone 
differences, take care of cultural norms etc. Hence, to make the agile successful in GSD context, 
the identified motivators are important to consider by the practitioners.   

5.3 Technology and agile success in GSD 
Hypothesis (H3): (intime and appropriate technology consideration could play a positive role for 
agile adoption in GSD context) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The hypothesis testing results shows the acceptance of H3, and this indicate that the technology 
is an important factor to consider for the agile success in GSD context. Today, the agile software 
development is not only human dependent but also about technology. To get the business return, 
there is a need to integrate and manage technologies in GSD environment. The agile in GSD, is a 
widely  considered  software  development  paradigm  that  need  the  adoption  of  appropriate  and 
effective technologies to make the software development process more innovative, collaborative, 
real-time, and productive [96]. In this era, GSD is also branded as distributed workforce rather 
than  co-located  teams.  A  continuous  cycle  of  development,  integration,  and  deployment  is  the 
ideal  way  for  a  geographically  distributed  agile teams  to  collaborate  and  innovate  that  directly 
linked teams with technology. While using agile in GSD, the basic challenges that most overseas 
teams  and  service  providers  face  are  related  to  time,  cost,  quality  and  the  risk  of  not  using  
appropriate  technologies  [97].  Khan  et  al.  [98]  indicated  the  engineering  excellence,  tools  and 
infrastructure  and  maturity  model  for  agile  transformation  as  the  core  areas  that  need  to  be 
consider by the practitioner to make the agile successful in GSD context.   

5.4 Process and agile success in GSD 
Hypothesis (H4): (to successfully manage the agile in GSD, the consideration of an appropriate 
process is important) 

According  to  statistical  analysis  results,  H4  is  accepted,  and  this  renders  the  importance  of  a 
concrete process for executing the agile practices in GSD context. The implementation of agile 
practices  in  GSD  environment  is  a  complex  activity,  as  the  agile  is  communication  and 
coordination-oriented  methodology  and  is  the  core  challenge  of  GSD  paradigm.  To  make  the 
agile  based  software  development  scaling  successful  in  GSD  context,  there  is  a  need  of  a 
comprehensive  process.  The  process  should  define  the  roadmaps  and  activities  that  need  to  be 
followed  by  agile  and  GSD  practitioners  to  develop  the  software  according  to  the  need  and 
expectation of the client and vendor.   

In  GSD  the  development  teams  belong  to  geographically  distributed  areas  and  the  language, 
cultural  and  time  zoon  differences  are  the  core  inherited  problems.  Tatiane  et  al.[99]  indicated 
that  to  manage  the  software  development  activities  in  GSD  context,  the  agile  based  software 
development  organizations  should  follow  strategies  to  prioritize  the  project  management 
activities. Begel and Nagappan [100] mentioned  that the practitioners of agile based paradigm 
feel delays in response from overseas  GSD sites, which negatively impact the overall software 
development  activities.  Another  important  challenge  reported  by  Niazi  et  al.  [101]  is  that  a 
number of clients endorse agile in GSD context with their vendors prior to testing the maturity of 
their project management in geographically distributed context.  Thus, the project management is 
an important  area  that need to  be focused for the successful agile  practice’s  execution in  GSD 
context.  

6. Threats to validity  
Internal threats to validity:  
Like  any  other  human  actions,  the  present  research  inherits  some  threat  to  validity.  First  and 
foremost,  the  present  research  attempts  to  under-stand  the  impact  of  the  motivators  of  agile 
success in GSD. 18 motivators were explored reported by the literature and there is a chance of 
missing  some  related  literature,  which  causes  the  missing  of  some  motivators.  Hence, 

 
 
 
 
considering  other  existing  studies,  this  omission  is  not  systematic  [1,  80,  102,  103].  
Furthermore,  to  address  this  threat,  we  added  and  open-ended  section  in  survey  questionnaire, 
where’s  we  requested  the  survey  participant  to  add  additional  motivators.  But  we  did  not  find 
any motivator reported by the survey participants, and this evident that the identified motivators 
cover the core aspects of agile in GSD context.  

The second step of this study is to get the insight of industry experts to determine the acceptance 
or  rejections  of  proposed  hypothesis.  For  experts’  data  collection,  the  questionnaire  survey 
method was used. To check the construct validity of survey study, the pilot study was conducted, 
and survey instrument was assessed with 5 experts, before starting data collection process. Based 
on the experts’ suggestions, the questionnaire was modified; and the accepted questionnaire was 
used for data collection. This gives the acceptable internal validity of data collection instrument.     

Construct validity:   
In  empirical  investigation,  the  construct  validity  is  concerned  with  the  measuring  scales  and 
whether  they  accurately  represent  the  attributes  being  measured  in  a  questionnaire  survey.  A 
possible  threat  is  that  the  survey-  participants  might  have  problem  while  interpreting  the 
variables. To address this threat, we have conducted meeting with some of the respondents via 
Zoom  and  WhatsApp,  Team  and  Skype;  also,  the  email  address  is  clearly  stated  on  the 
questionnaire survey invitation to reach-out the research team. However, we did not receive any 
email  from  respondents,  and  this  shows  the  used  survey  instrument  is  clear  for  every  survey 
participant.   

External threat:  
The sample size is also one of the major threats toward the generalization of study results. The 
collected complete sample size of this study is n=139 and based on the statistical rules (n=5) and 
based on the other studies [1, 102, 104, 105] this is a representative data set for generalizing the 
study results. In addition, the study results are also applicable for all size of organizations. As in 
empirical study, there is a representative set of participants from small, medium, and large size 
organizations.   

Ethical threats: 
As the data collection was performed in  two different  ways i.e., via physical  visit  and through 
online questionnaire survey. For physical visit, we signed a contract of understanding of terms of 
research which defines the researcher’s framework, parties’ rights, responsibilities, and damages, 
in  case  not  to  compromise  on  data  quality.  The  researcher  has  an  important  role  and 
responsibilities  not  to  disclosure  of  respondent’s  personal  information  and  his  firm  identical 
information.  For  online  data  collection  process,  all  the  participants  are  invited  via  invitation 
letter, and they were assured that the collected data will only be used for research purpose and 
will not be disclosed for other circumstances. Furthermore, we also get permission from ethical 
research  board  of  LUT  University  by  explaining  them  the  objective  and  hypothesis  of  our 
empirical study.  

Theoretical threats:  
This refers to the research-teams’ concepts and the theorized relationships in the context of the 
proposed  theoretical  model.  The  critical  concern  is  whether  the  researcher  has  provided  an 

 
 
 
 
 
accurate  theoretical  explanation  of  the  developed  theoretical  model.  It  is  believed  that  the 
investigated motivators for agile scaling in GSD context are relevant with each other to develop 
a theoretical model.  

7 Study Implications  
The result of this study has implications for both research community and industry practitioners.  

For researchers:  
The study results give the insight of state-of-the-art literature published in mainstream research 
body  and  explore  the  motivators  concerning  to  agile  adoption  in  GSD  context.  The  researcher 
can  consider  the  explored  list  of  18  motivators  for  future  research  on  agile  adoption  in  GSD 
environment.  Secondly,  the  motivators  were  classified  into  four  major  areas  of  GSD  process 
improvement  that  give  the  insight  to  research  community  to  develop  effective  strategies  to  fix 
each area of agile scaling in GSD domain. As this study explore the important motivators against 
core  four  areas  of  software  development  process  improvement.  It  encourages  the  researcher  to 
conduct studies with the intent to identify the critical barriers and their best solution. Moreover, 
the  results  of  empirically  hypotheses  testing  serve  as  of  body  knowledge  for  researchers  to 
understand  the  impact  of  different  factors  on  agile  scaling  in  GSD  context.  And  what  do 
practitioners  really  think  about  the  identified  motivators  of  agile  implementation  in  GSD 
environment.  In  addition,  the  study  has  also  extended  the  use  of  success  factors  theory  in 
software  engineering  domain,  which  gives  the  understanding  to  software  engineering  research 
community to use this concept in their future research.  

For Practitioners:  
The results and analysis of this study are useful for practitioner is several ways. Practitioners can 
use the list of identified motivators as a knowledge base to plan agile activities in a GSD project. 
Organizations can use the explored motivators to enhance their project management capabilities 
by  developing  training  opportunities  to  target  areas  where  further  skill  development  is  needed. 
Practitioners will also find it helpful to focus on the four core process areas to better plan agile 
process  in  a  GSD  project.  Organizations  can  use  the  list  of  motivators  as  an  indicator  to  hire 
software  engineers  with  these  specific  skills  as  a  risk  mitigation  strategy  for  agile  based  GSD 
projects. The study findings provide GSD organizations with the ability to check their existing 
list  of  process  areas  they  are  focusing  and  could  improve  them  based  on  the  list  of  identified 
motivators of our study.  The study findings would help the practitioners to focus on the weak 
and specific areas that gives the opportunity  to develop  the effective strategies before going  to 
implement agile activities in GSD context. To conclude, the findings of this study will serve as 
guideline  for  GSD  organizations  to  better  plan  agile  activities  for  the  successful  and  quality 
project development.  

For Future work:  
The  technological  revolution  changes  the  world  in  a  global  village,  and  the  software 
development  industry  get  its  fruit  in  the  form  of  global  software  development  paradigm.  In 
global  software  development  paradigm,  the  practitioners  are  from  different  geographically 
distributed environment (over the globe) with different time zone, languages and cultural norms 
and ethics. This diversity in GSD teams is one of the major problems. In future, we will conduct 
systematic study to understand the core ethical problems of GSD teams and their solutions. We 

 
 
 
 
will also conduct empirical study to understand the real-world problem and best practices using 
by GSD organizations to fix the ethical issues of overseas teams.   

8 Conclusion  
Technology is all around us, and it is integrated into our daily lives. Regular tasks now have a 
faster and more efficient way of doing them.  Software is truly powering the world; it enables the 
functionality of our business, healthcare, smart cities, power plants, communication, and combat 
equipment.  We can safely say, software give hand in  all aspect  of the world, and it depend on 
software to operate effectively and efficiently. 

To  the  development  of  quality  and  efficient  software,  the  software  organizations  continuously 
looking the ways to improve the software development process. Agile is one of the most widely 
adopting  software  development  approach.  To  improve  the  agile  practices  in  global  software 
development, this study elaborates the 18 important motivators relating to the core areas of GSD 
process improvement, reported by the research community. Considering the concept of theory of 
success  factors,  we  conducted  a  questionnaire  survey  study  to  understand  the  impact  of 
motivators and their core categories on agile successfulness in GSD domain. The findings of this 
study indicated that organizational management, team, technology, and process are the important 
areas that could positively influence the agile scaling in GSD context. Moreover, the identified 
motivators are important to consider to effectively address the organizational management, team, 
technology,  and  process  areas.  We  also  noted  that  there  is  a  strong  correlation  among 
organizational management, team, technology, and process areas to execute the agile practices in 
GSD environment. Moreover, the frequency analysis results presented that according to industry 
practitioners,  the  highlighted  motivators  against  each  process  areas  of  GSD  are  significantly 
important to consider to agile success in GSD environment. We believe that this in-depth study 
gives an important insight to readers concerning to the important areas that need to be focused 
for agile adoption in GSD.  

Appendix: Used survey questionnaire, raw data, and data in the form of PLS are given at: 
https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.19740388 

References  
[1] 

A. A. Khan, J. Keung, M. Niazi, S. Hussain, and A. Ahmad, "Systematic literature review 
and  empirical  investigation  of  barriers  to  process  improvement  in  global  software 
development:  Client–vendor  perspective,"  Information  and  Software  Technology,  vol. 
87, pp. 180-205, 2017. 
A.  G.  J.  N.  R.  L.  Q.  Beged‐Dov,  "Contract  award  analysis  by  mathematical 
programming," vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 297-307, 1970. 
C.  Ebert,  M.  Kuhrmann,  and  R.  Prikladnicki,  "Global  software  engineering:  Evolution 
and trends," in 2016 IEEE 11th International Conference on Global Software Engineering 
(ICGSE), 2016, pp. 144-153: IEEE. 
P.  J.  Ågerfalk,  B.  Fitzgerald,  H.  H.  Olsson,  and  E.  Ó.  Conchúir,  "Benefits  of  global 
software  development:  the  known  and  unknown,"  in  International  Conference  on 
Software Process, 2008, pp. 1-9: Springer. 

[2] 

[3] 

[4] 

[5]  M.  Shameem,  R.  R.  Kumar,  C.  Kumar,  B.  Chandra,  and  A.  A.  Khan,  "Prioritizing 
challenges  of  agile  process  in  distributed  software  development  environment  using 

 
 
 
 
analytic hierarchy process," Journal of Software: Evolution and Process, vol. 30, no. 11, 
p. e1979, 2018. 
A.  A.  Khan,  J.  W.  Keung,  and  M.  Abdullah-Al-Wadud,  "SPIIMM:  toward  a  model  for 
software  process  improvement  implementation  and  management  in  global  software 
development," IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 13720-13741, 2017. 
N.  Ramasubbu,  "Governing  software  process  improvementsin  globally  distributed 
product  development,"  IEEE  Transactions  on  Software  Engineering,  vol.  40,  no.  3,  pp. 
235-250, 2013. 
I.  Savin,  K.  Chukavina,  and  A.  J.  S.  B.  E.  Pushkarev,  "Topic-based  classification  and 
identification of global trends for startup companies," pp. 1-31, 2022. 

[6] 

[7] 

[8] 

[9]  M.  Marinho,  A.  Luna,  and  S.  Beecham,  "Global  software  development:  practices  for 
cultural  differences,"  in  International  Conference  on  Product-Focused  Software  Process 
Improvement, 2018, pp. 299-317: Springer. 

[10]  C. Qi and P. Y. Chau, "Relationship or contract? Exploring the key factor leading to IT 

outsourcing success in China," Information Technology & People, 2015. 

[11]  E.  Carmel,  J.  A.  Espinosa,  and  Y.  Dubinsky,  ""  Follow  the  Sun"  Workflow  in  Global 
Software Development," Journal of Management Information Systems, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 
17-38, 2010. 

[12]  A.  A.  Abdullah  and  H.  U.  Khan,  "FreGsd:  A  Framework  for  Global  Software 

[13] 

[14] 

Requirement Engineering," JSW, vol. 10, no. 10, pp. 1189-1198, 2015. 
J.  Zhu  and  G.  Morgan,  "Global  supply  chains,  institutional  constraints  and  firm  level 
adaptations:  A  comparative  study  of  Chinese  service  outsourcing  firms,"  Human 
Relations, vol. 71, no. 4, pp. 510-535, 2018. 
J.  Eriksson,  "Analyzing  potential  barriers  of  Agile  adoption  in  Chinese  software 
development organizations," ed, 2015. 

[15]  X.  Qiao,  "Analysing  the  Impact  of  Chinese  Cultural  Factors  on  Agile  Software 

Development," 2018. 

[16]  A.  Putta,  M.  Paasivaara,  and  C.  Lassenius,  "Benefits  and  challenges  of  adopting  the 
scaled agile framework (SAFe): preliminary results from a multivocal literature review," 
in  International  Conference  on  Product-Focused  Software  Process  Improvement,  2018, 
pp. 334-351: Springer. 

[17]  P.  Abrahamsson,  O.  Salo,  J.  Ronkainen,  and  J.  Warsta,  "Agile  software  development 

methods: Review and analysis," arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.08439, 2017. 

[18]  K. Beck et al., "Manifesto for agile software development," 2001. 
[19]  K. Beck et al., "Manifesto for agile software development, 2001," ed, 2001. 
[20]  M.  Paasivaara  and  C.  Lassenius,  "Scaling  scrum  in  a  large  globally  distributed 
organization:  a  case  study,"  in  2016  IEEE  11th  International  Conference  on  Global 
Software Engineering (ICGSE), 2016, pp. 74-83: IEEE. 

[21]  M.  Paasivaara,  B.  Behm,  C.  Lassenius,  and  M.  Hallikainen,  "Large-scale  agile 
transformation at Ericsson: a case study," Empirical Software Engineering, vol. 23, no. 5, 
pp. 2550-2596, 2018. 
J. M. J. E. s. e. Bass, "How product owner teams scale agile methods to large distributed 
enterprises," vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 1525-1557, 2015. 

[22] 

[23]  M.  Giannakis,  D.  Doran,  and  S.  Chen,  "The  Chinese  paradigm  of  global  supplier 
relationships:  Social  control,  formal  interactions  and  the  mediating  role  of  culture," 
Industrial Marketing Management, vol. 41, no. 5, pp. 831-840, 2012. 

[24]  M. Paasivaara, "Adopting SAFe to scale agile in a globally distributed organization," in 
2017  IEEE  12th  International  Conference  on  Global  Software  Engineering  (ICGSE), 
2017, pp. 36-40: IEEE. 

[25]  F. O. Bjørnson, J. Wijnmaalen, C. J. Stettina, and T. Dingsøyr, "Inter-team coordination 
in  large-scale  agile  development:  a  case  study  of  three  enabling  mechanisms,"  in 
International Conference on Agile Software Development, 2018, pp. 216-231: Springer, 
Cham. 

[26]  S.  W.  Ambler  and  M.  Lines,  Disciplined  agile  delivery:  A  practitioner's  guide  to  agile 

software delivery in the enterprise. IBM press, 2012. 

[27]  K.  Dikert,  M.  Paasivaara,  and  C.  Lassenius,  "Challenges  and  success  factors  for  large-
scale  agile  transformations:  A  systematic  literature  review,"  Journal  of  Systems  and 
Software, vol. 119, pp. 87-108, 2016. 

[28]  T.  Dingsøyr,  M.  Mikalsen,  A.  Solem,  and  K.  Vestues,  "Learning  in  the  large-an 
exploratory  study  of  retrospectives  in  large-scale  agile  development,"  in  International 
Conference on Agile Software Development, 2018, pp. 191-198: Springer, Cham. 
[29]  T.  Dingsøyr  et  al.,  "Key  lessons  from  tailoring  agile  methods  for  large-scale  software 

development," IT Professional, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 34-41, 2019. 

[30]  K.  Kuusinen,  P.  Gregory,  H.  Sharp,  L.  Barroca,  K.  Taylor,  and  L.  Wood,  "Knowledge 
sharing  in  a  large  agile  organisation:  A  survey  study,"  in  International  conference  on 
agile software development, 2017, pp. 135-150: Springer, Cham. 

[31]  V. Stray, N. B. Moe, and A. Aasheim, "Dependency management in large-scale agile: a 
case  study  of  DevOps  teams,"  in  Proceedings  of  the  52nd  Hawaii  International 
Conference on System Sciences, 2019. 

[32]  T. Dingsøyr, N. B. Moe, T. E. Fægri, and E. A. Seim, "Exploring software development 
at  the  very  large-scale:  a  revelatory  case  study  and  research  agenda  for  agile  method 
adaptation," Empirical Software Engineering, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 490-520, 2018. 

[33]  S. Bick, K. Spohrer, R.  Hoda, A. Scheerer, and  A. Heinzl, "Coordination  challenges in 
large-scale  software  development:  a  case  study  of  planning  misalignment  in  hybrid 
settings,"  IEEE  Transactions  on  Software  Engineering,  vol.  44,  no.  10,  pp.  932-950, 
2017. 

[34]  R.  Prikladnicki,  C.  Lassenius,  and  J.  C.  Carver,  "Trends  in  Agile:  From  Operational  to 

[35] 

Strategic Agility [Practitioners," IEEE Software, no. 1, pp. 95-97, 2019. 
J.  M.  Bass  and  A.  Haxby,  "Tailoring  product  ownership  in  large-scale  agile  projects: 
managing  scale,  distance,  and  governance,"  IEEE  Software,  vol.  36,  no.  2,  pp.  58-63, 
2019. 

[36]  G.  Bäcklander,  "Doing  complexity  leadership  theory:  How  agile  coaches  at  Spotify 
practise enabling leadership," Creativity and Innovation Management, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 
42-60, 2019. 

[37]  S. V. Spiegler, C. Heinecke, and S. Wagner, "Leadership gap in agile teams: how teams 
and scrum masters mature," in International Conference on Agile Software Development, 
2019, pp. 37-52: Springer. 

[38]  N. Rashid and S. U. Khan, "Agile practices for global software development vendors in 
the development of green and sustainable software," Journal of Software: Evolution and 
Process, vol. 30, no. 10, p. e1964, 2018. 
J. A. Glud, K. H. Hansen-Schwartz, and R. F. Ciriello, "Exploring customer influence on 
the  agile  transformation  of  service  providers,"  in  2019  IEEE/ACM  41st  International 

[39] 

Conference  on  Software  Engineering:  Companion  Proceedings  (ICSE-Companion), 
2019, pp. 300-301: IEEE. 

[40]  M.  Kuhrmann  and  J.  Müench,  "SPI  is  Dead,  isn't  it?  Clear  the  Stage  for  Continuous 
Learning!,"  in  2019  IEEE/ACM  International  Conference  on  Software  and  System 
Processes (ICSSP), 2019, pp. 9-13: IEEE. 

[41]  M.  Jorgensen,  "Relationships  between  project  size,  agile  practices,  and  successful 
software  development:  results  and  analysis,"  IEEE  Software,  vol.  36,  no.  2,  pp.  39-43, 
2019. 

[42]  R.  Aurisch,  M.  Ahmed,  and  A.  Barkat,  "An  outlook  at  Agile  methodologies  for  the 
independent games developer," International Journal of Computers and Applications, pp. 
1-7, 2019. 

[43]  F.  Calefato  and  C.  Ebert,  "Agile  Collaboration  for  Distributed  Teams  [Software 

Technology]," IEEE Software, vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 72-78, 2019. 

[44]  A.  Hemon,  B.  Lyonnet,  F.  Rowe,  and  B.  Fitzgerald,  "From  Agile  to  DevOps:  Smart 

Skills and Collaborations," Information Systems Frontiers, pp. 1-19, 2019. 

[45]  R.  A.  B.  Ouriques,  K.  Wnuk,  T.  Gorschek,  and  R.  B.  Svensson,  "Knowledge 
management  strategies  and  processes  in  agile  software  development:  a  systematic 
literature  review,"  International  journal  of  software  engineering  and  knowledge 
engineering, vol. 29, no. 03, pp. 345-380, 2019. 

[46]  R. Anwar, M. Rehman, K. S. Wang, and M. A. Hashmani, "Systematic literature review 
of  knowledge  sharing  barriers  and  facilitators  in  global  software  development 
organizations using concept maps," IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 24231-24247, 2019. 
[47]  M.  Kalenda,  P.  Hyna,  and  B.  Rossi,  "Scaling  agile  in  large  organizations:  Practices, 
challenges, and success factors," Journal of Software: Evolution and Process, vol. 30, no. 
10, p. e1954, 2018. 

[48]  S.  Denning,  "The  emergence  of  Agile  people  management,"  Strategy  &  Leadership, 

[49] 

2018. 
J. May, J. York, and D. Lending, "Play ball: bringing scrum into the classroom," Journal 
of Information Systems Education, vol. 27, no. 2, p. 1, 2019. 

[50]  M.-M. Judd and H. C. Blair, "Leveraging Agile Methodology to Transform a University 
Learning  and  Teaching  Unit,"  in  Agile  and  Lean  Concepts  for  Teaching  and  Learning: 
Springer, 2019, pp. 171-185. 

[51]  K. Conboy and N. Carroll, "Implementing large-scale agile frameworks: challenges and 

recommendations," IEEE Software, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 44-50, 2019. 

[52]  M. A. Akbar, S. Rafi, A. A. Alsanad, S. F. Qadri, A. Alsanad, and A. J. I. A. Alothaim, 
"Toward  Successful  DevOps:  A  Decision-Making  Framework,"  vol.  10,  pp.  51343-
51362, 2022. 

[53]  S. Rafi, M. A. Akbar, S. Mahmood, A. Alsanad, A. J. J. o. S. E. Alothaim, and Process, 
"Selection  of  DevOps  best  test  practices:  A  hybrid  approach  using  ISM  and  fuzzy 
TOPSIS analysis," vol. 34, no. 5, p. e2448, 2022. 

[54]  S.  Dännart,  F.  M.  Constante,  and  K.  Beckers,  "An  assessment  model  for  continuous 
security  compliance  in  large  scale  agile  environments,"  in  International  Conference  on 
Advanced Information Systems Engineering, 2019, pp. 529-544: Springer. 

[55]  A. Hemon, B. Lyonnet, F. Rowe, and B. Fitzgerald, "Conceptualizing the Transition from 
Agile to DevOps: A Maturity Model for a Smarter IS Function," in International Working 
Conference on Transfer and Diffusion of IT, 2018, pp. 209-223: Springer. 

[56]  M.  Laanti  and  P.  Kettunen,  "SAFe  adoptions  in  Finland:  a  survey  research,"  in 

International Conference on Agile Software Development, 2019, pp. 81-87: Springer. 

[57]  P.  Robinson  and  S.  Beecham,  "TWINS-This  Workflow  Is  Not  Scrum:  Agile  Process 
Adaptation  for  Open  Source  Software  Projects,"  in  2019  IEEE/ACM  International 
Conference on Software and System Processes (ICSSP), 2019, pp. 24-33: IEEE. 
[58]  B.  Nagaria,  B.  C.  Evans,  A.  Mann,  and  M.  Arzoky,  "Using  an  Instant  Visual  and  Text 
Based  Feedback  Tool  to  Teach  Path  Finding  Algorithms:  A  Concept,"  in  2021  Third 
International  Workshop  on  Software  Engineering  Education  for  the  Next  Generation 
(SEENG), 2021, pp. 11-15: IEEE. 

[59]  A. Hulshult and T. C. J. A. J. o. B. Krehbiel, "View Point," 2021. 
[60]  T. Dingsøyr, D. Falessi,  and K. Power, "Agile development  at  scale: the  next  frontier," 

IEEE Software, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 30-38, 2019. 

[61]  T.  Sedano,  P.  Ralph,  and  C.  Péraire,  "The  product  backlog,"  in  2019  IEEE/ACM  41st 

International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), 2019, pp. 200-211: IEEE. 

[62]  V.  Lenarduzzi  and  D.  Taibi,  "MVP  explained:  A  systematic  mapping  study  on  the 
definitions of minimal viable product," in 2016 42th Euromicro Conference on Software 
Engineering and Advanced Applications (SEAA), 2016, pp. 112-119: IEEE. 

[63]  M. Bertling, H. Caroli, M. Dannapfel, and P. Burggräf, "The Minimal Viable Production 
System (MVPS)–An Approach for Agile (Automotive) Factory Planning in a Disruptive 
Environment,"  in  Congress  of  the  German  Academic  Association  for  Production 
Technology, 2018, pp. 24-33: Springer. 

[64]  E.  Knauss,  "The  missing  requirements  perspective 

in 
development," IEEE Software, vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 9-13, 2019. 

large-scale  agile  system 

[65]  P. Kettunen, M. Laanti, F. Fagerholm, T. Mikkonen, and T. Männistö, "Finnish enterprise 
agile  transformations:  a  survey  study,"  in  International  Conference  on  Agile  Software 
Development, 2019, pp. 97-104: Springer. 

[66]  F.  R.  de  Sá,  R.  G.  Vieira,  and  A.  M.  da  Cunha,  "Lessons  Learned  from  the  Agile 
Transformation  of an Aeronautics Computing  Center,"  in  Brazilian  Workshop on Agile 
Methods, 2019, pp. 85-91: Springer. 

[67]  K. G. Grunert and C. Ellegaard, The concept of key success factors: theory and method. 

MAPP, 1992. 

[68]  D. R. J. H. b. r. Daniel, "Management information crisis," pp. 111-121, 1961. 
[69] 

J. F. J. H. b. r. Rockart, "Chief executives define their own data needs," vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 
81-93, 1979. 

[70]  C. V. Bullen and J. F. Rockart, "A primer on critical success factors," 1981. 
[71]  W.  W.  J.  M.  m.  f.  b.  r. Chin,  "The  partial  least  squares  approach  to  structural  equation 

modeling," vol. 295, no. 2, pp. 295-336, 1998. 

[72]  H. Wold, "Soft modelling: the basic design and some extensions, Systems under indirect 

observation," pp. 36–37, 1982. 

[73]  Y.  Wang,  "Building  the  linkage  between  project  managers'  personality  and  success  of 
software  projects,"  in  2009  3rd  International  Symposium  on  Empirical  Software 
Engineering and Measurement, 2009, pp. 410-413: IEEE. 

[74]  M. Senapathi and A. Srinivasan, "An empirical investigation of the factors affecting agile 
usage," in Proceedings of the 18th international conference on evaluation and assessment 
in software engineering, 2014, pp. 1-10. 

[75]  S. Bahl, O. J. I. M. Wali, and C. Security, "Perceived significance of information security 
governance  to  predict  the  information  security  service  quality  in  software  service 
industry: An empirical analysis," 2014. 

[76]  R.  Govindaraju,  A.  Bramagara,  L.  Gondodiwiryo,  T.  J.  J.  o.  I.  R.  Simatupang,  and 
Applications,  "Requirement  volatility,  standardization  and  knowledge  integration  in 
software projects: an empirical analysis on outsourced IS development projects," vol. 9, 
no. 1, pp. 68-87, 2015. 

[77]  L.  Ramanathan,  S.  J.  J.  o.  S.  Krishnan,  and  I.  Technology,  "An  empirical  investigation 
into  the  adoption  of  open  source  software  in  Information  Technology  outsourcing 
organizations," 2015. 

[78]  W.  W.  Chin,  "How  to  Write  Up  and  Report  PLS  Analyses,  in:  Esposito  Vinzi,  Chin 

V.,W. W., J. Henseler, H. Wang (Eds.)," Springer Berlin, Heidelberg. , 2010. 

[79]  K.  Finstad,  "Response  interpolation  and  scale  sensitivity:  Evidence  against  5-point 

scales," Journal of Usability Studies, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 104-110, 2010. 

[80]  M. Niazi, S. Mahmood, M. Alshayeb, A. M. Qureshi, K. Faisal, and N. Cerpa, "Toward 
successful project management in global software development," International Journal of 
Project Management, vol. 34, no. 8, pp. 1553-1567, 2016. 

[81]  C. Croux, C. J. S. m. Dehon, and applications, "Influence functions of the Spearman and 

Kendall correlation measures," vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 497-515, 2010. 

[82]  D.  George,  SPSS  for  windows  step  by  step:  A  simple  study  guide  and  reference,  17.0 

[83] 

update, 10/e. Pearson Education India, 2011. 
J.  Henseler,  C.  M.  Ringle,  and  R.  R.  Sinkovics,  "The  use  of  partial  least  squares  path 
modeling  in  international  marketing,"  in  New  challenges  to  international  marketing: 
Emerald Group Publishing Limited, 2009. 

[84]  R.  M.  J.  Q.  O’brien  and  quantity,  "A  caution  regarding  rules  of  thumb  for  variance 

inflation factors," vol. 41, no. 5, pp. 673-690, 2007. 

[85]  C.  Fornell  and  D.  F.  J.  J.  o.  m.  r.  Larcker,  "Evaluating  structural  equation  models  with 

unobservable variables and measurement error," vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 39-50, 1981. 

[86]  K. K.-K. J. M. B. Wong, "Partial least squares structural equation modeling (PLS-SEM) 

[87] 

techniques using SmartPLS," vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 1-32, 2013. 
J.  F.  Hair,  C.  M.  Ringle,  M.  J.  J.  o.  M.  t.  Sarstedt,  and  Practice,  "PLS-SEM:  Indeed  a 
silver bullet," vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 139-152, 2011. 

[88]  T. K. Dijkstra, J. J. C. s. Henseler, and d. analysis, "Consistent and asymptotically normal 

PLS estimators for linear structural equations," vol. 81, pp. 10-23, 2015. 

[89]  R. Vallon, B. J. da Silva Estácio, R. Prikladnicki, T. J. I. Grechenig, and S. Technology, 
"Systematic literature review on agile practices in global software development," vol. 96, 
pp. 161-180, 2018. 

[90]  S.  Beecham,  T.  Clear,  R.  Lal,  J.  J.  J.  o.  S.  Noll,  and  Software,  "Do  scaling  agile 
frameworks address global software development risks? An empirical study," vol. 171, p. 
110823, 2021. 

[91]  D.  M.  Szabó  and  J.-P.  Steghöfer,  "Coping  strategies  for  temporal,  geographical  and 
sociocultural  distances  in  agile  GSD:  a  case  study,"  in  2019  IEEE/ACM  41st 
International  Conference  on  Software  Engineering:  Software  Engineering  in  Practice 
(ICSE-SEIP), 2019, pp. 161-170: IEEE. 

[92]  R. Jain,  U. J. I. J.  o. G. Suman, and D. Computing, "Effectiveness  of  agile practices in 

global software development," vol. 9, no. 10, pp. 231-248, 2016. 

[93]  R. Camara, A. Alves, I. Monte, and M. Marinho, "Agile global software development: A 
systematic  literature  review,"  in  Proceedings  of  the  34th  Brazilian  Symposium  on 
Software Engineering, 2020, pp. 31-40. 

[94]  Y.  Li  and  A.  Maedche,  "Formulating  effective  coordination  strategies  in  agile  global 

software development teams," 2012. 

[95]  A. Hidayati, E. K. Budiardjo, and B. Purwandari, "Hard and soft skills for scrum global 
software  development  teams,"  in  Proceedings  of  the  3rd  International  Conference  on 
Software Engineering and Information Management, 2020, pp. 110-114. 

[96]  M. Shameem, A. A. Khan, M. G. Hasan, and M. A. J. I. S. Akbar, "Analytic hierarchy 
process based prioritisation and taxonomy of success factors for scaling agile methods in 
global software development," vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 389-401, 2020. 

[97]  M.  A.  Rafeek,  A.  F.  Arbain,  and  E.  J.  I.  J.  S.  C.  M.  Sudarmilah,  "Risk  mitigation 

techniques in agile development processes," vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 1123-1129, 2019. 

[98]  A.  A.  Khan,  M.  Shameem,  M.  Nadeem,  and  M.  A.  J.  A.  S.  C.  Akbar,  "Agile  trends  in 
Chinese global software development industry: Fuzzy AHP based conceptual mapping," 
vol. 102, p. 107090, 2021. 

[99]  T.  Lautert,  A.  G.  S.  S.  Neto,  and  N.  P.  Kozievitch,  "A  survey  on  agile  practices  and 
challenges  of  a  global  software  development  team,"  in  Brazilian  Workshop  on  Agile 
Methods, 2019, pp. 128-143: Springer. 

[100]  A.  Begel  and  N.  Nagappan,  "Global  Software  Development:  Who  Does  It?,"  in  IEEE 

International Conference on Global Software Engineering, 2008, pp. 195,199. 

[101]  M. Niazi, S. Mahmood, M. Alshayeb, M. R. Riaz, and K. Faisal, "Challenges of Project 
Management in Global Software Development: Initial Results," in IEEE Technically Co-
Sponsored Science and Information Conference, London, October 2013, 2013, pp. 202-
206. 

[102]  M.  Niazi  et  al.,  "Challenges  of  project  management  in  global  software  development:  A 

client-vendor analysis," Information and Software Technology, vol. 80, pp. 1-19, 2016. 

[103]  M.  A.  Akbar  et  al.,  "Success  factors  influencing  requirements  change  management 
process  in  global  software  development,"  Journal  of  Computer  Languages,  vol.  51,  pp. 
112-130, 2019. 

[104]  M. Csikszentmihalyi and R. Larson, "Validity and reliability of the experience-sampling 
method," in Flow and the foundations of positive psychology: Springer, 2014, pp. 35-54. 
[105]  R. C. MacCallum, K. F. Widaman, S. Zhang, and S. J. P. m. Hong, "Sample size in factor 

analysis," vol. 4, no. 1, p. 84, 1999. 

 
