2
2
0
2

g
u
A
8
2

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
5
3
2
3
1
.
8
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

HOW SEGREGATION PATTERNS AFFECT THE AVAILABILITY OF
FAIR DISTRICT PLANS

A PREPRINT

William Hager

Betseygail Rand

Dept. of Mathematics, Computer Science, and Information Systems,
Texas Lutheran University, 1000 W Court St., Seguin, 78155, Texas, USA

August 30, 2022

ABSTRACT

We create 4200 synthetic cities which vary in percent minority population and their residential
segregation patterns. Of these, 1200 are modeled on existing cities, and 3000 are rectangular grid
cities. In each city, we consider single-member voting district plans for a hypothetical city council
election. A fair district plan is deﬁned as one where the number of minority-majority districts is
proportional to the city-wide minority population. Thus each city is summarized by three traits:
minority percent, a measure of segregation, and availability of a fair district plan. We ﬁnd that
when the minority population is around 25%-33%, there is a positive correlation between the degree
of segregation and the availability of proportional district plan. Consistently, when the minority
population lives in a more diffuse residential pattern, there are fewer available proportional district
plans. Finally, we develop a new method to validate runtime and sample size of an ensemble of
district plans created by the GerryChain software program.

Keywords: Gerrymandering, GerryChain, Redistricting, Racial Segregation

1

Introduction

In this paper, we investigate the question of how residential segregation patterns affect the availability of a fair district
plan. We are interested in city council districts of midsize American cities, roughly 300,000-750,000 in population,
with a city council elected by single member districts, ranging from 7-13 districts in the city. We create 4200 synthetic
cities, some modeled on speciﬁc American cities and others based on a rectangular grid. Each city has three associated
properties: the percent minority of total population, a measure of racial segregation, and a measure of the availability of
a proportional district plan.

We ﬁnd a positive correlation between the degree of residential segregation and the availability of a fair district plan.
Moreover, a large proportion of cities have no proportional plans available at all. We conclude that in a majority of
cases, single member districts are likely not the best method to ensure proportional representation.1

Along the way, we propose a new method of validating sample size for an ensemble analysis of valid district plans. We
create a deﬁnition for two district plans to be distant from each other, and ﬁnd an upper bound for a maximal set of
mutually distant plans. We then locate a maximal number of mutually distant plans in the ensemble plans. We ﬁnd that
our ensembles achieve between 0.53 and 0.85 of the possible upper bounds, providing some evidence that the statespace
is in fact being explored. Implementing this validation requires very little computational power.
In Section 2, we ﬁrst review existing measures of quantifying gerrymandering. We then deﬁne ¯F , the fairness index, a
measure of the availability of a proportional district plan, using an ensemble analysis. In Section 3, we review measures
of segregation in the literature, and introduce the choice for this paper, D, the dissimilarity index. In Section 4, we

1The authors wish to acknowledge a debt to Moon Duchin, whose offhand comment during the Austin Gerrymandering

Conference (February 3rd, 2018) planted the question for study.

 
 
 
 
 
 
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 30, 2022

describe our methodology of creating the synthetic cities. Of these, 3000 are rectangular grid cities, and 1200 are
modeled after American cities. We also give a new method for validating runtime of GerryChain in this section. In
Section 5, we give the results and establish strong correlations between the degree of segregation and the availability of
a proportional district plan. In Section 6, we ground these results in the broader current American context.

2 Measures of Gerrymandering

It is useful to separate out different categories used when evaluating gerrymandering. First, people differ on what is
meant by a fair district plan. Second, there is a choice on how to evaluate fairness. Third, there is a separate question of
how to assess the availability of a fair district plan for a speciﬁc election.

What is a reasonable notion of fair? First, each single-member district must have equal population, under the Equal
Protection Clause, and must comply with the Voting Rights Act. Beyond that, there are many different metrics to
evaluate a district plan for gerrymandering, and often these have a speciﬁc meaning of “fair" embedded within them.
Historically, “compactness" was taken as a measure of fairness, and oddly-shaped districts were suspected of being
gerrymandered. This speaks to a meaning of “fair" based on human behavior: small-scale manipulation of boundaries
is unfair and indicates an attempt to swing an election. More recently, there has been an effort to quantify “fairness"
more precisely. For example, the efﬁciency gap measures the excess votes of the winning party against the votes that
did not contribute to a win of the losing party. [11, 22] Underlying this, “fair" implies that the two parties ought to have
the same proportion of voters whose votes contribute to victories. For measures based on a seats-vote curve, “fair" is a
linear vote distribution. [23] Mean-median bias, partisan bias, and other symmetry based measures take into account
the deviation of an election outcome from this linear vote distribution.

Partisan gerrymandering is nonjusticiable under current law, [1] but could be considered easier to detect than racial
gerrymandering, because detecting party preferences is reasonably straightforward - the outcome of an election is often
a suitable proxy for partisan allegiance. The outcome of a single election can be taken as a basis for a seats-votes
curve or to measure an efﬁciency gap. Racial gerrymandering is legally protected, but harder to detect. Under the 1986
decision in Thornberg vs. Gingles, there were established some preconditions for racial gerrymandering, namely the
degree of racially polarized voting in a region and voter turnout by racial subgroup. [2] The outcome of a single election
does not give enough information to determine if the majority subgroup is consistently preventing a minority subgroup
from being represented by a candidate of choice.

In this paper, we are interested in “fair" as it applies to racial bias in district plans. We will not attempt to model racially
polarized voting, nor varying degrees of voter turnout. We will also not model elections. Instead our notion of “fair" is
based on counting minority-majority districts within a district plan. A fair district plan will be deﬁned as one where
the number of minority-majority districts is proportional to the minority population of the city. We will use census
data, rather than Voting Age Population (VAP) data. This is not identical to measuring opportunity districts, which
are determined using voter turnout and election outcomes, but our methods could be adjusted for a speciﬁc city where
the threshold for being an opportunity district has been established. One additional advantage is that determining a
minority-majority district is essentially the same computation as a single-member district election outcome, in the
context of studying partisan gerrymandering. In the next section, we formalize our notion of “fair".

2.1 The Fairness Index, ¯F

Suppose we have a city X with n districts, with population P . We designate the historically vulnerable subgroup
Q, and we require Q > P/2n, the minimum sufﬁcient number of votes to constitute a majority of one district. We
consider P − Q to be the remainder group, including both the traditionally dominant population and all other minority
populations. As a simpliﬁcation, we will almost entirely restrict our attention to cities with only one historically
vulnerable subgroup that is sufﬁciently large to win a district. For a given district plan d, let dQ be the number of
districts which are minority-majority.

To determine if this percent is fair, we appeal to our intuition: a district plan is fair if the percent minority-majority
districts matches the city-wide minority Q/P . For example, suppose a city is 30% African-American and has 10
single-member voting districts. Under district plan d, there are three minority-majority districts, and so dQ = 3.
This achieves proportional representation, and thus is fair. In contrast, suppose a second district plan d(cid:48) has one
minority-majority district, d(cid:48)

Q = 1. This falls short of proportional representation, and thus is not fair.

We deﬁne the fairness index F (d, Q, X) = dQ/n
Q/P , the ratio of the percent minority-majority districts to the percent
population Q. For the example above, F (d, Q, X) = 1 and F (d(cid:48), Q, X) = 1/3. In general, if F < 1, then population

2

A PREPRINT - AUGUST 30, 2022

Q is underrepresented in the district plan d, and if F > 1, then population Q is overrepresented in minority-majority
districts in d.

We note that F (d, Q, X) is useful for evaluating representation of a subgroup Q across different district plans and
across different cities, but it is not symmetric about 1 in an immediately useful way. If Q/P = 0.3 and dQ/n = 0.4,
then F (d, Q, X) = 1.33, while F (d, P − Q, X) = 0.85.

2.1.1

¯F , the city-wide Fairness Index

The question arises: is a fair district plan always available? Is it sometimes the case that a fair district plan cannot be
drawn? This question has been well-answered by the development of ensemble analyses, which determine a baseline
availability of a district plan according to a given metric of fairness. [11]

We use GerryChain, the software package developed by the Metric Geometry and Gerrymandering Group (MGGG), in
2017.[15] For each city, the program generates 20,000 valid district plans. (For a district plan to be valid, the districts
must all be continuous, and within 0.2 of the average district population.) See Appendix C.3 for details.

For a ﬁxed city X, and a set of district plans S, Fd is computed for all district plans d ∈ S, with respect to a subgroup
Q. We then deﬁne ¯F for this city to be the average of {Fd|d ∈ S},ie ¯F (X, S, Q) = (cid:80)
Fd
|S| . If X, S and Q are
unambiguous from context, we will use ¯F without indicating these.
If ¯F = 1, then we use this as a proxy to presume that a map yielding a proportional number of minority-majority
districts is readily available. If ¯F < 1, then it will be more difﬁcult to locate a fair map. If ¯F > 1, then the subgroup Q
is overrepresented in the majority of district plans.

d∈S

The program must run long enough to ensure that the random walk thoroughly explores the statespace, and generates a
statistically representative sample. In Section 4.3, we develop a new method to validate the runtime of GerryChain.
Brieﬂy, the statespace of district plans is impossibly large [16], and we propose a deﬁnition for two district plans to be
distant in this statespace. We then ﬁnd an upper bound on the size of a set of pairwise distant district plans, and then
determine the number of pairwise distant district plans in the set of 20,000 plans. We ﬁnd that our set of district plans
has a number of distant district plans which is close to maximal, indicating that the set is in fact sampling many parts of
the statespace.

3 Measures of Segregation

3.1 Brief Literature Review

There is extensive literature on quantitative measures of segregation. One of the oldest measures of segregation is the
dissimilarity index, proposed by Duncan & Duncan in 1955. [13] This measure computes the region-wide proportion of
two groups of people, and then aggregates the local deviation of proportion, across small spatial units that make up the
region. To date, this is the most commonly used measure of segregation. In a very inﬂuential 1988 paper, Massey &
Denton described ﬁve qualities that constitute racial segregation: evenness, exposure, concentration, centralization,
and clustering, and surveyed 20 measures of segregation according to their performance on these measures. [20] The
dissimilarity index is considered to measure evenness. They conclude that D correlates with measures of the other
qualities, and thus afﬁrm the practice of using it as a summary measure, especially given how simple a computation it
is. However, D does not extend easily to multi-group situations. As an indication of its inﬂuence, the Census Bureau
organizes its webpage on Measures of Residential Segregation according to Massey & Denton, and gives formulas as
presented in their 1988 paper. [3]

Two major critiques of traditional measures are known as the Checkerboard Problem and the Modiﬁable Unit Area
Problem. The Checkerboard Problem refers to the fact that D is the sum of computations which are each contained
entirely within their own areal unit. Adjacencies of areal units do not contribute to the computation. [24] Therefore,
any rearrangement of areal units will produce a region with the same value of D. In particular, all similar units could
be clustered together in an extreme fashion (for example, splitting the board half black and half white) or distributed
evenly, like a checkerboard, and the value of D would not vary. The Modiﬁable Area Unit Problem (MAUP) was ﬁrst
described by Gehlke and Beale [14] and describes the general statistical problem of how aggregating geographic data
can be affected by choice of scale and boundary. Geographic indices like D depend on the choice of boundaries when
aggregating data, and redrawing the boundaries that are used to aggregate residential statistics can produce varying
values for D and other measures. For example, suppose the actual living patterns of residents resemble a checkerboard.
If census tracts are drawn to line up with the underlying checkerboard, then all areal units will contribute maximal
deviation from the citywide average. If census tracts are drawn to straddle adjacent squares, then each areal unit would

3

A PREPRINT - AUGUST 30, 2022

not deviate at all from the citywide average, and would contribute 0. In practice, a reﬁnement of areal unit will lead to
larger segregation index values, [25].

To address these concerns, spatial measures of segregation have been developed [25]. Many of these modify their metric
by allowing the local areal computation to incorporate the population ratios the neighboring areal units, which is then
weighted according to the population of the small unit at the center of the region. In this way, a region contributes to
all its neighbors. However, no single measure newer has emerged as a widespread standard, and all of them require a
substantial increase in computations over traditional measures.

3.2 Choice of Segregation Measure

We use D, the dissimilarity index, to measure the segregation of our synthetic cities. In general, suppose Q and P − Q
are mutually exclusive populations in a city X. Suppose further that the city is partitioned into areal tracts {vi}, and Qi
and (P − Q)i are the respective populations of Q and P − Q living within vi. The dissimilarity index D is computed
by:

D =

1
2

(cid:88)

i

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

Qi
Q

−

(P − Q)i
P − Q

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

[3]. If the ratio of Qi and (P − Q)i living in tract vi match the citywide ratio of Q and P − Q, then that areal tract vi
contributes 0 to the total D. If the tract vi is composed homogenously of one group, and has no members of the other
living there, then that tract will contribute maximally to the sum D. Therefore, D measures the extent to which areal
tracts deviate from the city-wide proportion of races. A city in which every tract is homogeneous will have D = 1, and
a city where every tract is proportional to the city will have D = 0.

4 Methodology

4.1 Building Synthetic Cities

In order to explore the relationship between racial residential patterns and the availability of fair district plans, we
create 4200 cities with varying degrees of segregation, and compute the fairness index for each. Of these, 1200 cities
are intended to be realistic and complex, and are modeled after real cities. The remaining 3000 are simpler and more
artiﬁcial - these are rectangular grid cities, with the same ﬁxed population at each census block.

4.1.1 Synthetic Modeled Cities

In designing realistic cities, we confront inﬁnitely many parameters that may describe a city. What does it mean to have
a realistic boundary or shape to a city? Should geographic features like rivers or mountains be present? Where should
an urban core be located? Where should the populations be densest and least dense? What should the ratio of Q to P
be, city-wide? How should the ratio of Q to P vary at each census tract, in order to vary racial residential patterns?
How many single-member districts should the city be divided into, or equivalently, how many individuals should be in
a district? What is the number of votes needed to win a single district, and how does that compare to the size of the
minority population?

To simplify the enormous complexity of this question, we choose four cities which vary on the relative size of the
historically vulnerable population, Q:

These populations were calculated by including all people living in all census blocks that intersect any city council
district or ward. [5, 6, 4, 8, 9, 17, 21] Note that these are not the populations for Metropolitan Statistical Areas
around these cities, because city council or city commission regions generally align with the city boundary and not the
larger region. Furthermore, these numbers differ from Census Bureau totals for city populations, because census tract
boundaries do not generally align with voting district boundaries.

In selecting cities, several factors were taken into account. We eliminated cities with three or more major populations,
in order to simplify the complexity of the task, and to allow the use of the dissimilarity index, D. In all four cities, 2010
census data identiﬁes “Asian alone" as the third largest population after Q, and only in the case of Minneapolis is this
group large enough (5.63%) to constitute a voting majority of a single district, and in all cases this third largest group is
signiﬁcantly smaller than the group designated Q. This restriction eliminated many cities in California, for example, as
well as most cities with total population P above a million people. After that, we sought cities representing a range of
ratios between Q and the total population P - roughly speaking, we wished to represent Q : P ratios of 1:2, 1:3, 1:4,

4

A PREPRINT - AUGUST 30, 2022

Table 1: Demographics of Cities to Generate Synthetic Modeled
Cities

City

Population P
in 2010

Subgroup Q
Population

Albuquerque

545,711

Charlotte

735,847

Pittsburgh

305,704

Minneapolis

382,578

254,834
Hispanic/Latino
268,404
African-American
84,819
African-American
79,967
African-American

Q/P

0.467

0.365

0.277

0.209

Number of
Districts

9

7

9

13
wards

and 1:5. We aimed for cities with populations larger than 250K. Finally, where available, we chose cities representing
different regions of the United States. (While 2010 data is 12 years out of date, it is no less “realistic" for our purposes.)

We let these four cities govern nearly all of the parameters of our synthetic model cities. In other words, a synthetic
version of Albuquerque will have the same boundary, same population, same dual graph representation, same regions
with dense or sparse housing, and same census block populations as Albuquerque, but the racial compositions of the
census blocks will vary to yield an alternate residential segregation pattern. It is as if all residences are left intact, but
the people have been redistributed. For each city, 300 synthetic versions are created using a redistribution algorithm to
place people into census blocks around the city. [See Appendix A for full details.]

Note: The authors wish to acknowledge that this method erases a tremendous amount of history which led to the current
racial residence patterns in these actual cities, and we do not trivialize that erasure. In addition, were historians or
sociologists to design counterfactual versions of these cities, they would take into account pressures and events that
shaped how residential segregation patterns emerge, and many of our synthetic cities would surely seem nonsensical.
We hope that a synthetic modeled city merely provides a mathematical comparison for the availability of fair district
plans, and does not diminish the lives and history of the actual residents of these cities.

In total, there are 1200 of these synthetic cities, 400 for each of Albuquerque, Charlotte, Pittsburgh, and Minneapolis.
We call these synthetic cities our Modeled Cities, to distinguish them from the rectangular grid cities, in the next section.

4.1.2 Grid Cities

For the remaining 3000 synthetic cities, we build a 30 ×30 grid city, with 1000 individuals living in each census block,
for a rectangular city with 900 vertices and 900,000 people. Grid cities are divided into 10 single-member districts.

While the modeled cities only differed on their racial residential pattern, the grid cities have two variables of freedom:
the size of the minority population, Q, and the racial residential pattern. All possible segregation levels, as measured by
the dissimilarity index D, and all possible percents Q are represented fairly equally, as shown in Figure 1.

The algorithm for placing individuals of Q and P − Q thoughout the city has asymmetric rules for placing the vulnerable
population and the dominant population into vertices. (See Appendix A.) When modeling cities based on Albuquerque,
Charlotte, Pittsburgh, or Minneapolis, the historically vulnerable population percentage Q/P is always less than 0.5
of the total population. In creating the grid cities, Q/P is allowed to range from 0 to 1, thus creating cities where the
larger population was placed according to the algorithm’s rules for the vulnerable population. In this case, we maintain
the convention that Q refers to the population with size < 0.5P , regardless of whether it was placed according to the
algorithm’s rules for vulnerable or dominant populations.

4.2 Generating the set of district plans and validating the runtime for GerryChain

We begin with ﬁve graphs: the dual graph of Albuquerque, Charlotte, Pittsburgh, Minneapolis, and the 30×30 square
grid. For each graph, we began with four seed district plans. For modeled cities, the seeds were the original voting
districts, and three others which were generated using the algorithm in Appendix C.2. The grid graph used four
generated seeds. For each seed district plan, we then run the software package GerryChain to generate 5000 district
plans using GerryChain’s recombination proposal. (See [15] for details on GerryChain, and Appendix C.3 for speciﬁc
settings used here.) This yields 20,000 district plans for each dual graph.

5

A PREPRINT - AUGUST 30, 2022

Figure 1: Scatter-plot of Grid Cities by population Q/P and dissimilarity index D, showing that the sample of cities is
uniformly distributed over 0 ≤ D ≤ 1 and 0 ≤ Q/P ≤ 1

4.3

Technique to validate the runtime for GerryChain

If the sample is only taken from small portion of the statespace, then the statistics of the sample will not be useful
evidence for drawing conclusions about the statespace. Experimental data from 2019 suggests that tens of thousands of
ReCom steps in GerryChain will be sufﬁcient to achieve stable results under many real-world scenarios. [10] We seek
an additional way to conﬁrm that the algorithm is visiting distant parts of the statespace.

Let X be a city with n districts. Assume that each census block has a constant population and that each district is the
union of a constant number of census blocks. Let {Si} be the set of all valid district plans on X. Given a random walk
through {Si}, we would like to assess the spread of the sample throughout the statespace.

Designate some plan as S0, which will function as a quasi-origin in this space. We will describe pairs of district plans
as being “distant" or not, with respect to this reference plan S0.

Each plan Si is assigned an n-tuple vi with values in the set of subsets of census blocks as follows: Let mk be a district
of S0, and consider the intersection of mk with each of the n districts of Si. Designate the largest intersection as Mi,k.
(Intuitively, suppose a collection of people live in the district mk, and the city districts are redrawn from S0 to Si. Then
Mi,k represents the largest group of people from mk who will continue to vote together in a single district, under the
redistricting.) The largest intersection of mk need not be unique, in which case any largest will do.

Let vi = (cid:104)Mi,1, Mi,2, . . . , Mi,n(cid:105), the n-tuple of sets of census blocks. These entries represent the maximal groups
which are preserved if the city X redistricts from S0 to Si. Note that these are not unique - two district plans Si and
Sj could have the same associated n-tuple. However, S0 is the only plan which is associated with the n-tuple whose
entries compose the entire city.

Given two district plans, Si and Sj, we will say that Sj is distant from Si with respect to S0 if Mi,k ∩ Mj,k = ∅ for
all districts 1 ≤ i ≤ n of S0. (This depends so heavily on choice of S0 that it no longer aligns very well with a lay
intuition of what similar district plans might mean. At best, we are comparing the disruption caused by redistricting
from S0 to Si to that caused by redistricting from S0 to Sj. If Si and Sj are distant from each other, then no one is in a
maximally preserved group under both redistricting plans.) See Figures 2, 3, and 4 for illustration.

The set Mi,k was the largest component of mk, after it was fragmented into ≤ n components, and so Mi,k must contain
at least (1/n)th of the census blocks in mk (by the pigeonhole principle). Therefore, any collection of {Mi,k} contains
at most n mutually disjoint elements.

In addition, ∪kMi,k occupies at least 1/n of all census blocks in the city. If Si and Sj are distant from each other with
respect to S0, then Mi,k ∩ Mj,k = ∅ for every district k, 1 ≤ k ≤ n. Therefore ∪k(Mi,k ∪ Mj,k) occupy at least 2/n
of all census blocks, and if Si, Sj, Sl are pairwise all distant from each other, ∪k(Mi,k ∪ Mj,k ∪ Ml,k) will occupy at
least 3/n of all census blocks, and so on. Therefore n is an upper bound on the number of district plans which are all
pairwise distant from each other.

6

A PREPRINT - AUGUST 30, 2022

Figure 2: Two district plans, Si and Sj, with a reference plan S0.

Figure 3: In this ﬁgure, Mi,1 ∩ Mj,1 (cid:54)= ∅, and so Si and Sj are not distant from each other.

Figure 4: Example of two district plans which are distant with respect to S0.

We then use this to determine if the sample set {Sij } has explored the statespace {Si}. Given the sample {Sij },
we retain a maximal set of mutually distant district plans. If the size of the set is close to n, there is evidence that
GerryChain has explored the statespace. If the size of the set is closer to 1, it is hard to draw any conclusion about the
set {Sij }.

4.3.1 Notes on validation method

1. This notion of “distant" district plans depends heavily on choice of S0. If S0 contains a long skinny district
mk, then intuitively, we may expect that the longer perimeter would increase the number of ways that that
Mi,k ∩ Mj,k = ∅ for two district plans Si and Sj. If S0 contains a district which is roughly square or circular,
then the relatively smaller perimeter may yield fewer combinations where Mi,k ∩ Mj,k = ∅. (In fact, this
is borne out by the examples computed, below.) Therefore the same sample set of district plans {Sij } can
achieve differing numbers of mutually exclusive distant plans, according to choice of S0.

2. The number of district plans in the statespace is unwieldingly large [16], and therefore the number of district
plans which are not distant from Si with respect to S0 is extremely large. Thus this is a very coarse division of

7

A PREPRINT - AUGUST 30, 2022

our statespace. We can roughly say how many large, rambling territories of the statespace we have visited, but
this is not a very detailed claim. Still, it does provide evidence that we are not trapped in a small region of the
statespace.

3. We have assumed that each district contained the same number of census blocks, and that each census block
contained the same number of people. This facilitated an intuitive notion of Mi,k: the largest block of people
in district k who would still vote together under redistricting from S0 to Si.
These assumptions hold for our grid cities, but do not hold for the modeled cities; census blocks can range
from zero to hundreds of people. Since districts must be kept roughly similar in population, the number of
census blocks in a district is therefore highly variable. Each Mi,k still occupies at least 1/n of the census
blocks in district k, although the number of census blocks in each district is no longer constant. However, it is
still true that n is an upper bound on the number of distant district plans.

On the plus side, we note that the this computation is relatively quick to implement.

4.4

Implementation of GerryChain Validation

4.4.1 Grid Cities

Grid cities have 10 districts, and so the maximum number of mutually distant district plans is 10. In this case, we chose
three different seeds S0, and found a maximally large set of mutually distant plans within our 20,000 district plans with
respect to each seed.

The ﬁrst seed was a randomly generated choice of S0. (See Appendix C.2.) Under this choice, the 20,000 district plans
yielded a set of 7 mutually distant district plans. The second choice of seed was a rectangular grid pattern of 10 districts.
While n = 10 districts does not lend itself to a checkerboard pattern, the attempt was to get reasonably close to evenly
square districts. Out of a possible 10, there were again 7 mutually distant district plans with respect to this seed. The
ﬁnal choice of seed was a pattern of 10 horizontal rectangles, each running the full width of the city. Given two district
plans Si and Sj, we expect that it is much easier for Mi,k ∩ Mj,k = ∅ with respect to this S0. And in fact, when the
20,000 district plans are checked with respect to this seed, there are 9 mutually distant district plans.

Given this information, we conclude that we have reasonable evidence that the random walk is in fact moving throughout
the statespace of district plans, and not restricted to a small portion.

4.4.2 Modeled Cities

Albuquerque, Charlotte, Pittsburgh, and Minneapolis have 9 districts, 7 districts, 9 districts, and 13 wards respectively.
Therefore the maximum number of mutually distant district plans for each city is 9, 7, 9, and 13, in kind.

For each city, S0 was created randomly. (See Appendix C.2). The results are summarized in Table 2.

Table 2: Demographics of Cities to Generate Synthetic Modeled Cities

City

Sample size Number of mutually Upper bound on

distant plans

mutually distant plans

Albuquerque
Charlotte
Pittsburgh
Minneapolis

20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000

7
6
7
7

9
7
9
13

Thus we have evidence that the random walk was not constrained to a small portion of the statespace of district plans.

5 Results

In this section, we demonstrate the correlation between segregation and the availability of a fair district plan.

5.1 Synthetic Modeled Cities

Recall that each real city has 300 synthetic cities modeled on it. For each synthetic modeled city, we have computed its
measure of segregation, D, and measure of Fairness, ¯F . The dissimilarity index D indicates how closely the racial

8

A PREPRINT - AUGUST 30, 2022

proportions of each census block match the city-wide racial proportions. A value of D = 1 indicates that every census
tract is either entirely composed of members of Q or has no one from Q, and D = 0 indicates that the ratio Q/P within
every census tract is the same as the citywide ratio Q/P . The fairness index, ¯F , is intended to describe availability
of a district plan with a proportional number of minority-majority district, within the set of sampled district plans. It
is computed by taking the average percent of minority-majority districts across the ensemble of district plans, and
then normalizing the average by dividing by Q/P . A value of ¯F = 1 indicates that, across the sample, the average
percent of minority-majority districts is equal to Q/P . When ¯F < 1, the vulnerable population on average will have
fewer minority-majority districts, proportionally, than their share of the population, and if ¯F > 1, they will have more
minority-majority districts, proportionately.

5.1.1 Synthetic Albuquerque cities

In 2010, Albuquerque had a population of 545,711 people with 254,834 identiﬁed as Hispanic-Latino by the census,
and 9 city council districts. Therefore Q/P = 0.467 in our model Albuquerque cities, and it takes 30,317 people to
constitute a majority of a district. There are 9,149 census blocks, and thus vertices in the dual graph. A fair district plan
would then yield between 4-5 minority-majority district plans, and ¯F = 1 would indicate that on average, a city has
4.20 minority-majority districts across all 20,000 district plans.

The 300 synthetic Albuquerque cities exihibit a modest degree of correlation between residential segregation and
availability of a fair district plan, shown in Figure 5.

Figure 5: Scatter-plot of Albuquerque Modeled Cities by fairness index, ¯F and dissimilarity index D, with trendline

The slope of the regression line is 0.8664, and R2 = 0.427. No matter how the residents are distributed about the city,
there is often a fair district map available, although we note that as D approaches 0.1, it becomes increasingly hard to
ﬁnd proportional district plans.

(We do wish to note once more that in the real world, districts often have a lower threshold for qualifying as opportunity
districts than being strictly minority-majority, as we have deﬁned here. Political scientists determine the threshold for
opportunity districts by measuring voter turnout, degree of racially polarized voting, community activism, and other
nuanced characteristics of a speciﬁc group of people.)

5.1.2 Synthetic Charlotte cities

In 2010, Charlotte had a population of 735,847 people with 268,404 identiﬁed as African-American by the census, and
7 city council districts. Therefore Q = 36.5% in our model Charlotte cities, and it takes 52,561 people to constitute a
majority of a district. There are 8,822 census blocks, and thus vertices in the dual graph. A fair district plan would
then yield between 2-3 minority-majority district plans, and ¯F = 1 would indicate that on average, a city has 2.56
minority-majority districts across all 20,000 district plans.

In Figure 6 we see a strong correlation between segregation and opportunity districts:
The slope of the regression line is 0.8554, and correlation coefﬁcient R2 = 0.4245. Lower values of D indicate
a more diffuse, even distribution of the population Q. In many of these cities, it is very hard to achieve even one
opportunity district. In other words, while Q is more than ﬁve times larger than the threshold to win a single district,

9

A PREPRINT - AUGUST 30, 2022

Figure 6: Scatter-plot of Charlotte Modeled Cities by fairness index, ¯F and dissimilarity index D, with trendline

these populations are spread so evenly as to be self-cracking - it is impossible to draw a map which gives a 2-3
minority-majority districts. This is a demonstration of the phenomenon described in Locating the Representational
Baseline: Republicans in Massachusetts [12].

In contrast, when synthetic cities have high D, far more of the Q population lives in census blocks which are more
homogeneous than the citywide average. In these cities, maps with proportional-opportunities are far more likely to be
available.

5.1.3 Synthetic Pittsburgh cities

In 2010, Pittsburgh had a population of 305,704 people with 84,819 identiﬁed as African-American by the census, and
9 city council districts. Therefore Q = 27.7% in our model Pittsburgh cities, and it takes 16,984 people to constitute a
majority of a district. There are 8,822 census blocks, and thus vertices in the dual graph. A fair district plan would
then yield between 2-3 minority-majority district plans, and ¯F = 1 would indicate that on average, a city has 2.49
minority-majority districts across all 20,000 district plans. (See Figure 7.)

Figure 7: Scatter-plot of Pittsburgh Modeled Cities by fairness index, ¯F and dissimilarity index D, with trendline

The regression line has slope of 0.3515, and correlation coefﬁcient R2 is 0.1523. For cities with D < 0.6, it is rare that
a proportional district plan is easily available. Below to D = 0.4, there are many cities where it is virtually impossible
to ﬁnd a single minority-majority district.

5.1.4 Synthetic Minneapolis cities

Finally, Minneapolis had a population of 382,578 on the 2010 census, with 79,967 people identiﬁed as African-
American, for Q = 20.9%. With 13 wards, a majority in any district is 3.85% of the population and requires 14,715

10

people. A proportional district plan yields 2-3 minority-majority wards, and ¯F = 1 would indicate that an average city
has 2.72 minority-majority wards, on average. Results are shown in Figure 8.

A PREPRINT - AUGUST 30, 2022

Figure 8: Scatter-plot of Minneapolis Modeled Cities by fairness index, ¯F and dissimilarity index D, with trendline

Here, the regression line has slope 0.3016 and R2 = 0.1798. As before, as D tends towards 0.6 or lower, it becomes
impossible to locate even a single minority-majority ward.

5.2 Grid Cities

Our rectangular grid cities vary on three properties: percent minority population Q, dissimilarity index D, and fairness
index ¯F . Populations live along a 30 × 30 rectangular grid, with uniform population distribution of 1000 people per
vertex. Only the segregation patterns are varied, which amounts to varying the percent Q at each vertex.

5.2.1 Grid Cities Sometimes Resemble Synthetic Cities

As noted in Section 4.1.2, the full population of all 3000 grid cities are spread out evenly across all possible segregation
levels 0 ≤ D ≤ 1 and population 0 ≤ Q/P ≤ 0.5. (In Figure 9, we re-print Figure 1 for reference.)

Figure 9: Scatter-plot of grid cities by population Q/P and dissimilarity index D, showing that the sample of cities is
uniformly distributed over 0 ≤ D ≤ 1 and 0 ≤ Q/P ≤ 1 (shown earlier as Figure 1).

We ﬁrst demonstrate that the extent to which the grid cities behave similarly to the non-grid cities. In short, the general
trendlines are similar, but on the whole, grid cities generally yield higher ¯F than the modeled cities.

Recall that Albuquerque is 0.467 Hispanic/Latino. In Figure 10, we restrict our attention to those grid cities with
0.42 ≤ Q/P ≤ 0.5. The slope of the trendline on the grid cities in this range is 0.6463, with an average ¯F = 0.825.

11

A PREPRINT - AUGUST 30, 2022

Figure 10: Two scatter-plots of cities by fairness index ¯F and dissimilarity index D, for comparison. The ﬁrst set is of
Grid Cities with 0.42 ≤ Q/P ≤ 0.50 and the second set is of the Albuquerque modeled cities.

In comparison, the modeled Albuquerque cities have a trendline with slope of 0.8664 and average ¯F = 0.702. For
Charlotte, we compare grid cities with 0.32 ≤ Q/P ≤ 0.4, in Figure 11. Here, the grid cities trendline has a slope of

Figure 11: Two scatter-plots of cities by fairness index ¯F and dissimilarity index D, for comparison. The ﬁrst set is of
Grid Cities with 0.32 ≤ Q/P ≤ 0.40 and the second set is of the Charlotte modeled cities.

1.0681 and average ¯F = 0.565, compared to 0.8554 slope and average ¯F = 0.289 for the modeled Charlotte cities.
For the comparison to Pittsburgh modeled cities, we consider grid cities with 0.24 ≤ Q/P ≤ 0.32 in Figure 12. The

Figure 12: Two scatter-plots of cities by fairness index ¯F and dissimilarity index D, for comparison. The ﬁrst set is of
Grid Cities with 0.24 ≤ Q/P ≤ 0.32 and the second set is of the Pittsburgh modeled cities.

regression line for the grid cities has slope 0.9733 and average ¯F = 0.349, while the modeled Pittsburgh cities have
a line with slope 0.3515 and average ¯F = 0.118. Finally, with Minneapolis modeled cities, we consider grid cities
where 0.16 ≤ Q/P ≤ 0.24 in Figure 13. The grid cities in this range have a trendline slope of 0.6884 and average
¯F = 0.187, while the modeled cities have a slope of 0.3016 and average ¯F = 0.089.

Clearly the modeled cities only bear a partial resemblance to the distributions of the modeled cities. We are unable to
say whether the grid cities or modelled cities are more meaningful for modeling the possibilities of actual cities. Both
are ﬁctitious and have their limitations.

Our hope is that if we restrict our attention to those circumstances where these different methodologies yield compatible
results, then it is more likely that we are capturing something meaningful about actual cities in the real world.

12

A PREPRINT - AUGUST 30, 2022

Figure 13: Two scatter-plots of cities by fairness index ¯F and dissimilarity index D, for comparison. The ﬁrst set is of
Grid Cities with 0.16 ≤ Q/P ≤ 0.24 and the second set is of the Minneapolis modeled cities.

5.2.2 Dissimilarity Index vs. Percent Minority

We can then extrapolate along different conditions. For a ﬁxed Fairness, which combinations of D and P/Q achieve ¯F
in this range?

We ﬁrst note that the vast majority of grid cities score very low on ¯F , as shown in Figure 14, with a full 1390 of the
3000 cities in the negligibly small ¯F < 0.01 category. The vast majority of district plans in these cities do not contain a

Figure 14: A histogram of Grid Cities by fairness index ¯F , showing 1390 cities with ¯F < 0.01

single available minority-majority district in any district plan.

The histogram bins can each be individually highlighted, out of the full 3000 grid cities, as shown in Figure 15.

Figure 15: Scatter-plot of Grid Cities by population Q/P and dissimilarity index D, with colors showing each ¯F
histogram bin

For added clarity, we break out each bin individually, in Figure 16.

13

A PREPRINT - AUGUST 30, 2022

Figure 16: Six scatter-plot of Grid Cities by population Q/P and dissimilarity index D, one for each of the six ¯F
histogram bins.

Clearly both Q/P and D contribute towards the availability of a fair district plan. The grid cities with both a large
minority population and a fairly high degree of residential segregation have the largest number of proportional district
plans available. However, the vast majority of cities do not have any remotely proportional district plan available.

5.2.3 Minority percent Q by ¯F

For a ﬁxed segregation index D, how does the proportion of Q/P affect F ? In other words, if segregation patterns are
stable but there is an inﬂux or loss by particular groups, how does that affect F ?

Figure 17 shows the distribution of all 3000 cities. At every segregation level, an increase in Q/P correlates strongly
with an increase in the fairness index, ¯F . Each level of D is broken out individually in Figure 18. Regardless of
segregation pattern, cities with a smaller minority population will face difﬁculty ﬁnding proportional district plans.

Grid cities with diffuse populations of Q (D < 0.25) face dismal prospects for ﬁnding any available minority-majority
district until they comprise at least 0.4 of the population. Highly segregated grid cities (D ≥ 0.75) have many
options for proportional district plans, although it drops off as the minority population decreases below 0.1. Between
0.05 < Q/P ≤ 0.1, these communities rarely have any available minority-majority districts, despite still being slightly
above the threshhold population needed (Q/P = 0.05, for 10 districts).

6 Context within American cities in 2020

In 2020, the dissimilarity index between Black and White populations ranged from 16.01 to 80.04 in 88 American cities
with populations over 250,000, with an average D = 45.52 and standard deviation 14.62. Between Hispanic and White
populations, the range was 10.55 ≤ D ≤ 63.42, with an average D of 39.75, and standard deviation 11.37. [19]

The distribution of D across all cities over 250,000 (n = 88) are shown in Figure 19. Of the cities modeled in this

14

A PREPRINT - AUGUST 30, 2022

Figure 17: Scatter-plot of Grid Cities by population Q/P and fairness index F , with colors showing levels of
dissimilarity index D

Figure 18: Four individual scatter-plots of Grid Cities by population Q/P and fairness index F , each restricted to a
quartile of the possible range of dissimilarity index D

paper, actual values of D in 2010 are:

• Albuquerque: 36.4, with respect to Hispanic and White populations

• Charlotte: 53.8, with respect to Black and White populations

• Pittsburgh: 65.8, with respect to Black and White populations

• Minneapolis: 52.9, with respect to Black and White populations

[18]

The full distribution by racial segregation D and percent minority is shown in Figure 20.

Note that Q/P runs from 0 to 1 here, since there are cities where the historically vulnerable population is more than
0.50. In our grid cities, we designated the smaller population to be Q.

If our grid cities are predictive of reality, we would extrapolate the portion of our grid cities that represent the
demographics of the actual cities. In Figure 21, the scatter-plot showing the distribution of cities in 2020 is compared
with the scatter-plot showing the grid cities.

(Note that the vertical axes are not equivalent, per the note above.)

15

A PREPRINT - AUGUST 30, 2022

Figure 19: Distribution of cities over 250,000 in 2020, by dissimilarity index. Dissimilarity index is shown twice per
city, once with respect to Black and White populations, and the other with respect to Hispanic and White populations.

Figure 20: Scatter-plot of population P/Q by dissimilarity index D, of the cities in 2020 with populations over 250,000.
Dissimilarity index is shown twice per city, once with respect to Black and White populations, and the other with
respect to Hispanic and White populations. Note that Q/P runs from 0 to 1, since there are cities where the historically
vulnerable population is more than 0.50, in contrast to the grid cities.

Looking at the region occupied by the densest cluster of 2020 American cities, the corresponding grid cities have very
low fairnessindices. However, the American cities with higher Q/P and D could be modeled by cities with ¯F much
closer to 1.

7 Conclusion

We conclude that when the goal is proportional representation, single-member districts are usually a poor mechanism to
achieve it, unless populations are very close to 50-50. Other voting systems, such as Ranked Choice Voting or Single
Transferable Vote, appear to fare better at this goal.

We also note that there is occasionally a claim that Democrats self-pack into cities, and thus are underrepresented in
district plans because there is no proportional district plan available. [7] We are unable to ﬁnd modeling evidence that
suggests that higher concentrations of Democrats would make it more difﬁcult to draw a proportional district plan.

With the release of 2020 Census data, much new analyses can be carried out. It is likely that soon, most major
metropolitan areas will have ensemble analyses carried out to establish a baseline for the availability of a fair district
plan. The ways in which this intersects with racial segregation will be difﬁcult to tease apart, however. Most major
regions have more than two populations which are large enough to constitute a majority of at least one district
(depending on the relative size of the district), whereas our model cities were deliberately sought to enable the
simplifying assumption of only two sufﬁciently large racial groups.

16

A PREPRINT - AUGUST 30, 2022

Figure 21: Comparison of two scatter-plots of cities, both with respect to population P/Q by dissimilarity index D.
The ﬁrst is of American cities over 250,000, and the other is the of the 3000 grid cities. Note that vertical axes are not
equivalent, because there exist American cities with P/Q > 0.5.

References

[1] Rucho et al. v. Common Cause et al., Appeal from the United States District Court for the Middlea District
of North Carolina, note = No. 18–422. Argued March 26, 2019—Decided June 27, 2019*, howpublished =
https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/18pdf/18-422_9ol1.pdf,.

[2] Ballotpedia. Thornburg v. Gingles. https://ballotpedia.org/Thornburg_v._Gingles. Accessed: 2021-

12-28.

[3] United States Census Bureau. United States Census Bureau, Housing Patterns, Appendix B: Measures
of Residential Segregation. https://www.census.gov/topics/housing/housing-patterns/guidance/
appendix-b.html. Accessed: 2021-06-14.

[4] United States Census Bureau. United States Census Bureau, census block shapeﬁles for minnesota, new
mexico, north carolina, and pensylvania, 2011. Retrieved from https://www.census.gov/cgi-bin/geo/
shapefiles/index.php.

[5] United States Census Bureau. United States Census Bureau, hispanic or latino origin (p4), census blocks for
minnesota, new mexico, north carolina, and pensylvania, 2010 decennial census, summary ﬁle 1, 2011. Retrieved
from https://data.census.gov/cedsci/.

[6] United States Census Bureau. United States Census Bureau, race data (p8), census blocks for minnesota,
new mexico, north carolina, and pensylvania, 2010 decennial census, summary ﬁle 1, 2011. Retrieved from
https://data.census.gov/cedsci/.

[7] Jowei Chen and Jonathan Rodden. Unintentional gerrymandering: Political geography and electoral bias in

legislatures. Quarterly Journal of Political Science, 8(3):239–269, June 2013.

[8] New Mexico City of Albuquerque. City of albuquerque, city council districts shapeﬁle. Retrieved from https:

//www.cabq.gov/gis/geographic-information-systems-data in 2019.

[9] North Carolina City of Charlotte. City of charlotte, city council districts shapeﬁle. Retrieved from https:

//data.charlottenc.gov/maps/charlotte::council-districts/about in 2019.

[10] Daryl DeFord, Moon Duchin, and Justin Solomon. Recombination: A family of markov chains for redistricting,

2019.

[11] Moon Duchin. Gerrymandering metrics: How to measure? what’s the baseline? arXiv: Physics and Society, 2018.

[12] Moon Duchin, Taissa Gladkova, Eugene Henninger-Voss, Ben Klingensmith, Heather Newman, and Hannah
Wheelen. Locating the representational baseline: Republicans in Massachusetts. Election Law Journal: Rules,
Politics, and Policy, 18-4:388–401, Dec 2019.

[13] Otis Dudley Duncan and Beverly Duncan. A methodological analysis of segregation indexes. American

Sociological Review, 20(2):210–217, 1955.

[14] C. E. Gehlke and Katherine Biehl. Certain effects of grouping upon the size of the correlation coefﬁcient in census

tract material. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 29:185A:169–170, 1934.

[15] Metric Geometry and Gerrymandering Group. GerryChain. https://github.com/mggg/GerryChain. Ac-

cessed: 2021-12-28.

[16] Metric Geometry and Gerrymandering Group. The Known Sizes of Grid Metagraphs. https://mggg.org/

table. Accessed: 2021-12-28.

17

A PREPRINT - AUGUST 30, 2022

[17] Minnesota Hennepin County. Hennepin county, ward districts shapeﬁle. Retrieved from https://

gis-hennepin.hub.arcgis.com/ in 2019.

[18] University of Michigan Institute of Social Research. New Racial Segregation Measures for Large Metropolitan
Areas: Analysis of the 1990-2010 Decennial Censuses. https://www.psc.isr.umich.edu/dis/census/
segregation2010.html. Accessed: 2021-10-22.

[19] John R. Logan and Brian Stults. The persistence of segregation in the metropolis: New ﬁndings from the 2020

census. Diversity and Disparities Project, Brown University, 2021.

[20] Douglas Massey and Nancy Denton. The dimensions of residential segregation. Social Forces, 67(2):281–315,

1988.

[21] Pennsylvania Pittsburgh. City of pittsburgh, city council districts 2012 shapeﬁle. Retrieved from https:

//data.wprdc.org/dataset/city-council-districts-2012 in 2019.

[22] Kristopher Tapp. Measuring political gerrymandering. The American Mathematical Monthly, 126(7):593–609,

2019.

[23] Gregory S. Warrington. A comparison of partisan-gerrymandering measures. Election Law Journal: Rules,

Politics, and Policy, 18(3):262–281, 2019.

[24] Michael J White. The measurement of spatial segregation. American Journal of Sociology, 88(5):1008–1018,

1983.

[25] J. Yao, D.W. Wong, N. Bailey, and J. Minton. Spatial segregation measures: A methodological review. Tijds. voor

econ. en Soc. Geog., 110:235–250, 2019.

8 Appendices

A The Algorithm for Creating Synthetic Modeled Cities from Existing Cities

A.1 General Description

The algorithm we use to create synthetic cities from existing cities has several stages. At the end of the process, we
should possess a graph that represents a city where,

1. the city-wide population P and city-wide Subgroup Q population are unchanged from the original city, and

2. the total population within each census block is identical to the original city, even if the Subgroup Q population

within each block may be different, and

3. the dissimilarity index of the synthetic city will be sufﬁciently close to a chosen target value.

The intended effect is one where the population of the city is rearranged over the currently existing housing in the city.
This algorithm is used to create a wide variety of subgroup population patterns across the geographies of existing cities.
In particular, a variety of subgroup concentrations and placements is desirable.

A.2 Creating a Graph of the Existing City

Before creating a graph of an existing city, a GIS is used to create a shapeﬁle with the necessary geometries and data.
We start by removing all census block polygons that do not intersect a council district polygon. Next a total population
value and one subpopulation value of interest (Black or Hispanic) is joined to the remaining census block polygons.

To create the city graph, we use the Graph.from_file() method from GerryChain. This yields a dual graph, where
each census block polygon is represented by a vertex and an edges lies between a pair of vertices exactly when the
corresponding polygons share some part of their boundary. All data associated with a polygon in the shapeﬁle is also
transferred to its vertex.

For example, Albuquerque is shown in Figure 22, with corresponding dual graph in Figure 23. In the latter, the orange
and blue represent the distribution of Hispanic individuals (orange) and non-Hispanic individuals (blue), according to
the 2010 census.

18

A PREPRINT - AUGUST 30, 2022

Figure 22: Map of Albuquerque, with associated dual graph overlay

Figure 23: Dual Graph of Albuquerque

A.3 Creating Weights for Population Placement

After the graph of the city is built, we will assign two weights to each vertex of the city graph: one for Subgroup Q and
one for Subgroup P − Q.

First, we designate clusters of nodes (separately for Subgroups Q and P − Q) on which to place the highest weights.
Between 1 and 10 highest weight clusters are generated for each subgroup across the city. Highest weights are placed
on enough nodes in these clusters to house 80% of Subgroup Q and 20% of Subgroup P − Q. This is the step in the
algorithm which treats Q and P − Q in an asymmetric manner.

Once all of the highest weight clusters are in place, the weights are tapered down across adjacent vertices until reaching
a city-wide minimum. The slope of this taper is determined randomly. A shallow taper makes that cluster into a broader
region for the subpopulation. This may result in a more diffuse population pattern for that subgroup. A steeper taper
makes the cluster into a more tightly focused region. This may result in more concentrated population patterns for that
subgroup.

A.4 Placing Subgroup Populations

Once Subgroup Q and Subgroup P − Q have weights assigned to each node of the city, the algorithm proceeds to
assign subgroup populations randomly to the vertices of the city graph according to these weights. Subgroups Q and
P − Q are offered a list of available vertices, weighted accordingly, to place their members. The subgroups alternately

19

A PREPRINT - AUGUST 30, 2022

place groups of up to 20 members on vertices until their total population has been reached. As vertices reach capacity,
they are removed from the list of available vertices.

A.5 Adjusting the Dissimilarity Index

The random placements of Subgroups Q and P − Q in the previous step yield a city graph with a dissimilarity index that
is likely different from our desired target index. We now use a list of graph vertices sorted by Subgroup Q population
percentage to adjust the index toward the target. If dissimilarity index must be increased to reach the target, then people
from Subgroup Q in vertices with low Q-percentage are swapped with people from Subgroup P − Q in vertices with
high Q-percentage so that the Q-percentage ordering of the vertices changes little. Similarly, to lower the dissimilarity
index, people from Subgroup P − Q in vertices with low Q-percentage are swapped with people from Subgroup Q in
vertices with high Q-percentage. Repeat this process until the graph dissimilarity index is sufﬁciently close to the target.
Since the Q-percentage ordering of the vertices remains largely unchanged, the locations of concentrations of Subgroup
Q remain relatively undisturbed.

After this process is complete, each vertex in the city graph will contain the same number of people as its counterpart in
the graph of the original city. The city-wide populations of Subgroup Q and Subgroup P − Q will remain the same as
well. Further, the dissimilarity index of the city will be sufﬁciently close to the desired target.

B The Algorithm for Creating Grid Cities

B.1 General Description

Our grid cities are built on 30 × 30 grids. Each vertex of our grid holds 1000 people. Each person belongs to either
Subgroup Q or Subgroup P − Q.

Before any populations are assigned to the grid city, a target Subgroup Q percentage and target dissimilarity index are
randomly generated. We wish to generate a city that meets these targets.

B.2 Placing Subgroup Populations

We start populating our 30 × 30 grid by distributing people in Subgroup Q uniformly over all of the vertices of the
graph. The remaining space in each vertex is populated by people from Subgroup P − Q. This results in a 30 × 30 grid
with dissimilarity index 0.

We then use our algorithm, described in the previous section, to redistribute populations Q and P − Q around the grid
in a way that achieves a target dissimilarity index value.

C Assembling the Ensemble of District Plans

C.1 Number and Type

In this study 20,003 district plans were used for our grid city and 20,001 were used in each of our model cities of
Albuquerque, Charlotte, Pittsburgh, and Minneapolis. A district plan with n single-member districts is deﬁned by a
partition of the census blocks into n equal classes, such that each class is connected, and the total populations in each
class are within 0.2 of P/n.

For the grid cities:

1. Five partitions were generated “from scratch" using the algorithm in Appendix C.2.
2. 19,996 partitions were generated using GerryChain’s “recom” proposal.[15]
3. Two were drawn by hand.

For the four model cities:

1. Five partitions were generated “from scratch" using an algorithm in Appendix C.2.
2. 19,996 partitions were generated using GerryChain’s “recom” proposal.

In each city GerryChain was used to generate 4,999 partitions from four different “from scratch” partitions, yielding
the 20,000 partitions we used for the ensemble analysis. The remaining partitions (three for the grid city, one for each
model city) were used to validate the algorithm runtime for the other 20,000.

20

A PREPRINT - AUGUST 30, 2022

C.2 Generating Partitions “from scratch”

The algorithm for creating “from scratch” partitions functions as follows:

1. Randomly assign one vertex in the city graph to each district.

2. Every unassigned vertex adjacent to an assigned vertex should be given to the assigned vertex’s district. Repeat
until all vertices are assigned a district. Note that districts will be now be contiguous, but are unlikely to have
equal populations.

3. Have the district with the largest population give its boundary vertices to adjacent districts. The populations
between the districts will probably be closer to equal, but districts are no longer guaranteed to be contiguous.

4. Any noncontiguous districts will give away the boundary vertices of its smaller components to adjacent district
until the smaller components are gone. Note that populations may not be sufﬁcient close to equal at this point,
but all districts will be contiguous.

5. Repeat steps 3 and 4 until all districts are contiguous and fall within population constraints.

Note that it is possible for this algorithm to get stuck repeating steps 3 and 4. In our implementation, this ended up
being a rare occurrence

C.3 GerryChain Settings

Here are the GerryChain settings we used to create the 19,996 partitions for each city in this experiment. Please refer to
GerryChain documentation for an explanation. [15]

We used GerryChain’s MarkovChain command with the following settings:

• proposal=recom

• constraints=[contiguous, pop_constraint]

• accept=always_accept

Note that pop_constraint requires the population of each district to differ from the mean by no more than 20%.

D Data Availability Statement

Most data used for and generated by this project is available to the reader, with the exception of city council district
plans that have since been updated by their respective municipalities.

D.1 External Data Sources

We used the following sources of data for this project.

1. Census block shapeﬁles downloaded from https://www.census.gov/cgi-bin/geo/shapefiles/

index.php

2. City/county district shapeﬁles downloaded from Albuquerque, Charlotte, Hennepin County (Minneapolis),

and Pittsburgh geodata sites.

(a) Albuquerque City Council Districts (Posted version updated for 2022. Accessed in 2019.): https:

//www.cabq.gov/gis/geographic-information-systems-data

(b) Charlotte City Council Districts (Posted version updated for 2022. Accessed in 2019.): https://data.

charlottenc.gov/maps/charlotte::council-districts/about

(c) Hennepin County Wards (Contains Minneapolis. Posted version updated for 2022. Accessed in 2019.):

https://gis-hennepin.hub.arcgis.com/

(d) Pittsburgh City Council Districts (2012 map. Accessed 2019): https://data.wprdc.org/dataset/

city-council-districts-2012

3. Population data CSV ﬁles by census block from https://data.census.gov/cedsci/

21

A PREPRINT - AUGUST 30, 2022

D.2 Research Data

The following data generated by our research is available at the link https://osf.io/br5tf.

1. Dual graphs of the Albuquerque, Charlotte, Minneapolis, Pittsburgh, and our grid city. These can be found in

the “Dual Graph” folder for each city.

2. District assignments for each dual graph vertex in each of the 20,000 district plans generated for each city’s

ensemble. These can be found in the “Ensemble District Assignments” folder for each city.

3. District assignments for each dual graph vertex of the reference district plan used to validate each city’s

ensemble. These can be found in the “Validation Reference District Assignments” folder for each city.

4. Population data for each vertex of each generated city, along with dissimilarity index values and mean number
of opportunity districts, across 20,000 district plans, for each city. These can be found in the “Population
Placement and Analysis” folder.

22

