Phase Drift Monitoring for Tone Tracking Readout of
Superconducting Microwave Resonators

Max Silva-Feavera,b, Zeeshan Ahmedc,d, Kam Arnolda,b, Josef C. Frischc, John Grohe, Shawn
W. Hendersonc,d, Jesus Vasquezc, and Cyndia Yuc,f

aUniversity of California San Diego Department of Physics, 9500 Gilman Dr, La Jolla, CA,
USA
bCenter for Astrophysics and Space Sciences, 9500 Gilman Dr, La Jolla, CA, USA
cKavli Institute for Particle Astrophysics and Cosmology, Menlo Park, CA, USA
dSLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, 2575 Sand Hill Rd, Menlo Park, CA, USA
eNational Institute of Standards and Technology, 325 Broadway, Boulder, CO, USA
fStanford University Department of Physics, 450 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA, USA

ABSTRACT

A number of modern millimeter, sub-millimeter, and far-infrared detectors are read out using superconducting
microwave (1-10GHz) resonators. The main detector technologies are Transition Edge Sensors, read out using
Microwave SQUID Multiplexers (µmux) and Microwave Kinetic Inductance Detectors. In these readout schemes,
sky signal is encoded as resonance frequency changes. One way to interrogate these superconducting resonators
is to calibrate the probe tone phase such that any sky signal induced frequency shifts from the resonators show up
primarily as voltage changes in only one of the two quadratures of the interrogation tone. However, temperature
variations in the operating environment produce phase drifts that degrade the phase calibration and can source
low frequency noise in the ﬁnal detector time ordered data if left to drift too far from optimal calibration. We
present a method for active software monitoring of the time delay through the system which could be used
to feedback on the resonator probe tone calibration angle or to apply an oﬄine cleaning. We implement and
demonstrate this monitoring method using the SLAC Microresonator RF Electronics on a 65 channel µmux chip
from NIST.

Keywords: SQUID, Microwave SQUID Multiplexing, Multiplexing, Digital Signal Processing, Transition Edge
Sensor Arrays, MKIDs, FPGA-based RF Readout Electronics

1. INTRODUCTION

Superconducting microwave resonators fabricated in the O(1-10 GHz) range are a rapidly growing technology
for facilitating the readout of large format superconducting detector arrays for applications in low background
X-ray,1, 2 mm/sub-mm,3, 4 and optical/infrared5, 6 astronomy.
In particular, both Microwave Kinetic Induc-
tance Detectors (MKIDs)7 and Microwave Superconducting Quantum Interference Device (SQUID) Multiplexer
(µmux)8 readout architectures take advantage of the large readout channel counts and compact modules enabled
by high density nanofabrication of superconducting resonators. In both architectures astrophysical signals induce
shifts in the resonance frequencies of the resonators.

One way to read out these resonators is by generating a comb of probe tones each tuned to an individual
resonator’s frequency with a Digital to Analog Converter (DAC), transmitting the comb through the cryogenic
resonators, and measuring the received comb on an Analog to Digital Converter (ADC). We detect changes in each
resonator’s frequency by measuring changes in the real and imaginary components of the forward transmission
at the probe tone frequency.

Further author information: (Send correspondence to M.S.F.)
M.S.F.: E-mail: msilvafe@ucsd.edu

2
2
0
2

g
u
A
4

]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
4
5
8
2
0
.
8
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
The SLAC Microresonator Radio Frequency (SMuRF) Readout electronics9 used for measurements in this
article apply a calibration during the initial resonator “tuning” procedure converting measured voltage on the
ADC at each probe to an estimate of the frequency shift. This estimated frequency shift, called the frequency
error (df ), is then used to adjust the frequency of the tones such that df is always kept at 0. Regularly updating
the frequency of the probe tones allow SMuRF to tone-track keeping the probe tones on the resonance frequency
which confers numerous beneﬁts. Additionally, for µmux readout a ﬂux ramp (typically a saw tooth ramp) is
applied to the SQUIDs10 which transduces the detector signal to a phase shift of a periodic SQUID modulation.
The SMuRF ﬁrmware adaptively demodulates the ﬂux ramp modulation for all probe tones in real time and the
phase of the demodulated signal contains the detector signal.

Drifts in the round trip system time delay, however, spoil the calibration established during resonator tuning
and produce a leakage into the detector time ordered data. These drifts are primarily caused by temperature-
dependent length contraction in the coaxial cabling between the readout electronics and the cryostat. This eﬀect
can be corrected by monitoring the variation in system time delay and applying a correction to the channel-
dependent angle rotation. For experiments that integrate for long periods of time and care about the low
frequency noise proﬁle such as Cosmic Microwave Background telescopes, estimation, monitoring, and cleaning
of this leakage as we demonstrate in this proceedings is key to achieving stable noise performance over long
observations.

In this article we present a demonstration of phase drift monitoring and cleaning. In section 2 we describe
the experimental setup including the hardware conﬁguration in section 2.1 and the resonator tuning procedure
in section 2.2. Section 3 presents a detailed overview of the resonator transfer function and how it is aﬀected
by time delays, and section 4 estimates the level of drift we expect given some reasonable assumptions about
the hardware design and operating environment. Section 5 is a measurement demonstration validating our
assumptions about temperature coupling in section 4. In section 6 we introduce a modiﬁed measurement setup
designed to test phase drift cleaning and present the results of data cleaning method in section 6.1. Lastly in
section 7 we conclude and provide some avenues for future work on this eﬀort including implementation of an
active feedback method.

2. MEASUREMENT SETUP

Here we describe the measurement setup and standard operating procedure to set up µmux resonators for readout
of detectors using the SMuRF electronics. In section 2.1 we discuss the physical hardware connections in the
readout chain and in section 2.2 we review the software and ﬁrmware steps used to set up the readout.

2.1 Hardware Conﬁguration

Our measurement setup is at SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory in a large highbay-style assembly hall.
All measurements shown in this paper were taken between June and July of 2022 during the North American
summer time. The SMuRF electronics system used to generate the comb of RF probe tones, DC ampliﬁer biases,
and ﬂux ramp signal is located in a standard computing rack. Next to the rack is a ∼4m tall vibration-isolating
frame holding a Bluefors LD250 dilution refrigerator (DR). The warm RF coaxial cables used are Minicircuits
CBL-Xm-SMSM+ (where X is the cable length), which run ∼3.5m from the SMuRF RF input/outputs to an
interface plate that holds low noise ampliﬁers (LNAs) and ﬁxed attenuators, then an additional ∼ 1m to the
vacuum SMA feedthroughs on the top ﬂange of the DR for a total of ∼9m of round-trip warm cabling. Next to
the electronics rack is a water chiller used to cool the Cryomech PT415 compressor unit which turns on and oﬀ
on a ∼10 minute cycle. When turned on it exhausts hot air on the electronics rack and warm cables, creating a
∼0.4◦C temperature increase in the local operating environment.

Inside of the DR unit is a series of low loss, low thermal conductivity coaxial cables and ﬁxed attenuators
that carry the signals from the RF input to the mixing chamber which we PID to a temperature of 100mK. The
µmux chips used are the NIST umux100k v3.2 chips optimized for CMB applications11 installed into a single
chip sample box just large enough for a 64 resonator chip, 2 RF coax-to-CPW transition RF Rogers circuit
board, and a small DC FR4 DC interface board to carry in the ﬂux ramp lines. On the output are two stages
of cryogenic low noise ampliﬁcation (at 4 Kelvin, and 40 Kelvin). The cryogenic RF components are similar to
the design implemented for the Simons Observatory.12

Figure 1. Measurement setup for demonstrating streamed data cleaning using pilot tones. The pilot tones and resonator
probe tones are generated in the SMuRF (red box left), they then pass through a phase shifter (bold blue text) controlled
by a function generator (bold orange text) set to a 30 deg phase peak-to-peak 10 mHz sine wave, then sent through the
cryo cabling and resonators (blue box), and read back in with the SMuRF (red). All lab equipment is controlled with a
common server and the data for both the resonator channels and pilot tones are co-sampled and written to disk at 200
Hz.

A simpliﬁed measurement setup is shown schematically in ﬁgure 1. Shown in blue in the center is the round-
trip phase drift present in our readout system. We allow the temperature of the room to drive the cable phase
drift to test our assumptions about the scale of the temperature coupling to the cabling as discussed in section 5.
We alternatively use an analog phase shifter to inject a controlled phase signal to explore our cleaning method
over diﬀerent amplitude and timescales of phase injection as discussed in section 6.

2.2 Resonator Tuning
Our standard resonator tuning procedure is implemented in the pysmurf∗ user control software used to interface
with the SMuRF at a high level. It consists of four main steps: 1) estimating overall phase delay, 2) ﬁnding
resonances, and 3) estimating per-channel calibration. The phase delay estimation calculates the total time
delay from the tone synthesis through to the tone channelization by sweeping a tone across a central window and
ﬁtting the phase versus frequency. The algorithm then adjusts delay parameters in the ADCs and channelized
baseband processors to compensate for most of the ∼5-10 µS delay (dominated by the digital delays in ﬁrmware).
If left uncalibrated, the phase slope from the cable delay alone is on the same order as the phase slope around
resonance, as shown in the blue curve in ﬁgure 2. Once properly compensated we can recover the orange curve,
where the tails away from resonance asymptote to the same phase value around 1 radian and the phase slope is
largest on resonance.

Next we coarsely sweep a tone across the full SMuRF bandwidth (4-6 GHz) with a step size of ∼40 kHz
measuring the complex transmission at each point. Locations where there is concurrently a maximum in the
transmission phase derivative and a minimum in the transmission magnitude are identiﬁed as candidate res-
onators. The gold curve in ﬁgure 8 is an example of coarse sweep data. This is followed by a series of ﬁne sweeps
with step size ∼ 2 kHz in 600 kHz windows centered around the frequencies identiﬁed in the coarse sweep. The
orange data in ﬁgure 2 is an example of ﬁne sweep data.

This ﬁne sweep is used to calculate a further per-channel calibration parameter which rotates the probe tone
response such that the direction of maximum frequency response is aligned with the imaginary measurement
axis and the measured signal in the imaginary axis is scaled into units of frequency shift. This calibration is
shown graphically in ﬁgure 3a. The angle of the vector relative to the imaginary axis determines the rotation

∗pysmurf public Github repository: https://github.com/slaclab/pysmurf

Figure 2. The ﬁrst step in the resonator tuning removes the ﬁxed time delay in the system. The ﬁxed time delay produces
a large linear phase oﬀset (left) as a function of frequency (blue curve); shown on the same scale as the corrected data
(orange) (i.e. with ∼ 10 radians subtracted). If the ﬁxed delay is left uncorrected it produces a phase slope on the same
order as the slope through resonance, which complicates the resonance identiﬁcation. When the delay is corrected (orange
curve) the maximum phase slope is at resonance and the points far from resonance asymptote to the same value—in this
case ∼1 radian. In the Real-Imaginary plane the ﬁxed delay looks like many large loops (amplitude set by the loss around
the resonance frequency) with a small distorted elliptical circle at the resonance. The resonance shape is both rotated
and distorted (blue curve) relative to the corrected case (orange).

calibration which transforms the blue curve into the red, aligning the Q axis with the direction of frequency
shifts. The magnitude of the vector in units of Q voltage divided by the frequency oﬀset between the two points
used to calculate the vector provides the scaling from Q voltage to frequency shift, producing the green curve
where the axes are now scaled to frequency shift from resonance.

Figure 3c describes the nominal data streaming when all tuning steps are complete. The data measured from
a probe tone has two modes: 1) if a probe tone has feedback enabled, all of the aforementioned calibrations are
applied to estimate the frequency shift, which is then fed to the ﬂux ramp demodulation algorithm that outputs
the demodulated ﬂux ramp phase and an updated estimate of the resonance frequency. 2) if the feedback is
disabled for a channel, then the calibration steps are skipped and RF phase is calculated directly, ﬁltered, and
down-sampled to the same data rate as the feedback-enabled channels and written to disk.

In the current operational scheme all calibrations discussed in this section are assumed to be ﬁxed over an
observation. However, we know that this assumption can break down. In the rest of this article we describe one
way the calibration can vary, uncompensated time delays. We estimate and measure their expected magnitude,
and demonstrate a method for monitoring and cleaning contamination from these delays. The feedback oﬀ data-
taking mode described in this section is a key ﬁrmware feature enabling phase drift monitoring and cleaning.

3. EFFECTS OF TIME DELAY ON THE RESONATOR TRANSFER FUNCTION

Here we describe how a small uncalibrated time delay impacts the resonator transmission. A perfect quarter
wave resonance with no time delay, asymmetry, or loss readout in transmission is described by equation 1

S21,res(x) = 1 −

Qr
Qc

1
1 + i2Qrx

(1)

where S21,res is the scattering matrix forward transmission parameter of the resonator without cabling delay,
loss, etc. Qr is the resonator total quality factor, Qc is the coupling quality factor and is related to Qr and
c + Q−1
internal quality factor Qi by the relation Q−1
. f is the frequency of the probe tone and fr is the
resonance frequency. In the I-Q (real-imaginary) transmission plane this traces out a circle which crosses the
I-axis at the resonance frequency. The vector tangent to the circle at resonance is parallel to the Q-axis and
perpendicular to the I-axis. Figure 4 shows the IQ circle along with the transmission in magnitude, phase, I,
and Q vs frequency of the ideal resonator symmetric resonance.

r = Q−1

i

Figure 3. Description of probe tone processing. a) A graphical description of calibration steps applied to each feedback
enabled probe tone channel, which include a rotation and scaling to convert from Q to resonance frequency shift. The
black vector shown on all circles is used to calculate these calibration transformations. b) Transmission magnitude plot
zoomed in around a location with 3 resonances followed by a ﬂat background transmission showing the distinct frequency
locations where we place feedback enabled (green) and feedback disabled (red) tones. c) A ﬂow chart showing the diﬀerent
processing steps between feedback enabled and feedback disabled tones. If feedback is enabled the complex data from the
tone is rotated and scaled by the calibration factors to extract an estimate of resonance frequency shift, which is then
fed to the ﬂux ramp demodulation algorithm to update the tone frequencies and stream demodulated ﬂux ramp phase
data to disk. If feedback is disabled the complex data is converted to phase and this RF phase is then down-sampled and
written to disk co-sampled with the feedback enabled channels.

The time delay τ is the physical time it takes for a guided EM wave to travel some distance (cid:96) in a waveguide.
τ is set by the wavespeed v, which varies depending on the dielectric medium and geometry in the waveguide.
Given a time delay the amount of phase delay is linearly dependent on frequency as given by equation 2.

The eﬀect on the resonator transmission is a rotation of the resonator IQ circle and modiﬁes equation 1 to:

θ = 2πτ f



S21,meas(f ) = ei2πτ f

1 −

Qr
Qc

1

1 + i2Qr

(cid:17)

(cid:16) f −fr
fr


 = ei2πτ f S21,res

(2)

(3)

The rotation is visualized in ﬁgure 4, where a resonator with characteristic frequency of 5 GHz and 0 time
delay (solid line) is compared with an equivalent resonator with 10 pS of time delay added (dashed line). There
are two main impacts of the rotation when projected into the Q-axis: 1) the voltage measured in Q is no longer
0 when the probe tone is tuned to the resonance frequency (shown by a blue star in ﬁgure 4) and 2) the slope

Figure 4. Resonator transmission S21 at 0 cable delay (solid) and 10 pS delay (dashed) displayed in magnitude (upper
left), phase (lower left), I-Q plane (center), real (upper right), and imaginary (lower right).

dVQ/df evaluated at the resonance frequency, or conversion factor from voltage measured in Q to equivalent
frequency shift, is not equal to the value at τ = 0. Figure 5 shows the amount of slope change and VQ oﬀset as
a function of added time delay for a resonator at 5 GHz with axes shown in Q-axis units (left axis) as well as
referred to eﬀective frequency shift (right) axis converted via the df
dQ
to roughly 10 degrees the slope is roughly constant and up to about 1 degree the Q oﬀset is roughly constant.

calibrated at τ = 0. Note that the up

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)cal

Figure 5. An uncompensated time delay produces two main eﬀects: a mis-calibration of the dQ −→ df conversion, and
a probe tone frequency shift. Change in imaginary transmission slope (left) characterizes the gain mis-calibration and
projected Q component (right) characterizes the probe tone frequency drift shown on the right axis by converting the left
axis with the dQ −→ df at τ = 0. Both eﬀects are plotted for time delays between 1 fS and 100 pS.

4. ESTIMATED LEVEL OF TIME DELAY DRIFT

We assume (and conﬁrm in section 5) that the dominant time delay drift comes from the room temperature
coaxial cables that connect between the cryostat vacuum jacket and the SMuRF electronics. Here we estimate
the expected level of temperature drift given our cables and the thermal environment in our lab.

The dominant eﬀect driving temperature drifts in the cables comes from expansion and contraction of the
cable length driven mostly by the dielectric material. Most commonly used coaxial cables are constructed using
a solid Polytetraﬂuoroethylene (PTFE) dielectric core, although there are other coaxial cables that use diﬀerent
dielectrics or lower temperature coeﬃcient PTFE such as PTFE tape wrap, expanded PTFE,14 or Low Density
PTFE foams. These have lower temperature coeﬃcients, so an estimate of the induced phase from solid PTFE

Figure 6. Fractional cable length change as a function of temperature converted to expected phase delay at 5 GHz for a 30
ft cable length. Data for Solid PTFE digitized from a Microwave Journal technical note13 on diﬀering PTFE temperature
coeﬃcients.

represents an upper bound. The main eﬀect is a fractional change in length of the cable. The fractional change
in length for solid PTFE can be found in the cable manufacturer literature13 and is characterized by a knee
around 25◦C. We estimate the contraction in the operating temperature range between 25◦ and 35◦C which is
a linear range matched to the typical operating temperature range in our lab environment, as given in the inset
of ﬁgure 6.

δθ = 2πf

ppm
106

√

(cid:15)r
c

(cid:96)

(4)

Equation 4 is used to convert fractional length change in parts-per-mllion (ppm) to an expect phase change for
a given cable length and probe tone frequency. Taking equation 4 and the data shown in ﬁgure 6 we estimate
2.4 degrees phase per degree of temperature change at a 5 GHz readout frequency assuming that 30 ft of cable
(15 ft. in and 15 ft. out) is used to connect between the cryostat and the SMuRF electronics, matching our test
setup.

Figure 7. a) Histogram of the daily temperature swing at the APEX observation site in the the Atacama Desert in Chile
between 2012-2017, during which a median daily swing is ∼10◦C. The Atacama Desert is a popular observing site for
mm/sub-mm experiments which are particularly concerned with low frequency noise in their data. b) The typical night-
to-day temperature variation in the test lab at the SLAC National Accelerator in Menlo Park, CA, USA (orange) and
the corresponding phase shift at a resonator frequency as reconstructed from pilot tones (blue).

Figure 7a shows a distribution of daily temperature swing over 5 years between 2012-2017 at the APEX
observation site in the the Atacama Desert in Chile, a common observing site for mm/sub-mm and cosmic
microwave background experiments which are particularly concerned with control of low-frequency noise in their
data. Figure 7b shows a typical night-day temperature drift of ∼ 4◦C in our test lab at SLAC in June. The median
daily temperature swing in Atacama is ∼ 8◦C, which means we expect an average day to induce up to 20 degrees

of phase shift. Using shorter cables reduces this eﬀect linearly and using alternative cable constructions with
lower temperature coeﬃcients provides some hardware mitigation. For some applications hardware mitigation
may be suﬃcient but here we focus on a software correction method assuming the hardware mitigation cannot
reduce this eﬀect enough for our application.

5. THERMAL TIME DELAY RECONSTRUCTION

Here we set up a measurement to conﬁrm: 1) the assumption that thermal drifts dominate our cable phase shift
and 2) that the order of magnitude of the phase drift matches our expectations given cable construction and
operating environment as discussed in section 4.

To measure the cable time delay we turn on a number of additional probe tones, called pilot tones, tuned to
frequencies where there are no resonances and set to feedback oﬀ discussed in section 2.2. The locations of the
pilot tones used for this demonstration are shown in ﬁgure 8. There were also 20 tones placed between 4.5-5.5
GHz. The yellow curve shows the S21 with the resonance dips of the 64-channel multiplexer chip. Since the
phase is linearly related to the time delay (equation 2) we can estimate the time delay with a linear ﬁt to the
phase measured from the pilot tones versus their tone frequencies. We then use these ﬁt results to calculate the
phase delay at the tracked resonator frequencies.

Figure 8. Transmission proﬁle of a 64 channel resonator chip (solid gold) with the locations of the pilot tones in the 4-4.5
GHz band used for monitoring the variation in cable delay (dashed purple). Twenty additional tones are used between
4.5-5.5 GHz as well.

We sample the phase from the pilot tones at 5 Hz. Once every 30 seconds we take the diﬀerence in phase dθ
between the beginning and end of this interval and calculate the ﬁt to dθ vs f . From the ﬁt we calculate the
phase changes at the resonance frequencies. This calculated phase change is shown in blue on the right panel
of ﬁgure 7. We place a thermometer on one end of the RF cables (orange) and show that the reconstructed
phase shift qualitatively tracks the cable temperature, validating our assumption that the temperature coupling
is dominating our phase drift. In the future we plan to implement an active feedback in which the calculated
angle shifts are added to the resonator probe tone calibration angles on each feedback interval (in this example
30 seconds).

To maximize the magnitude of the eﬀect we stream data for 6-8 hours between the daily low temperature and
daily high temperature in our test lab. A plot of the temperature change over this period is shown in orange in
the right panel of ﬁgure 7. There is a total temperature change of ∼ 4 ◦C as well as a ∼10.5 minute (1.6 mHz)
temperature oscillation of roughly 0.4◦C caused by the chiller discussed in section 2.1.

To conﬁrm that the pilot tones are properly tracking the cable phase shifts we run the ﬁne sweep discussed in
section 2.2 at the beginning and end of the 7 hour dataset. We calculate the resonance circle rotation diﬀerence
between the beginning and end by ﬁtting the circle and calculating the tangent at the resonance frequency as
shown in ﬁgure 9a. We do this for all channels and compare with the oﬀset angle calculated using the pilot
tones during the stream as shown in ﬁgure 9b. There is a repeatable systematic oﬀset between the pilot tone
estimate and the circle tangent estimate, where the pilot tones always return a smaller shift compared the S21
tangent estimate method. Despite this, as shown in the bottom panel of ﬁgure 9b we are still able to reduce

the eﬀect of the cable drift by ≥80%. There is also an oscillation on top of the slope seen in the circle tangent
angle estimate data (blue) but not the pilot tone angle estimate data (orange) due to the fact that we are only
ﬁtting the pilot tones to a linear model with frequency. However, if we turn on many more pilot tones across the
same bandwidth such that we are densely mapping this oscillation period we do see this pattern in the diﬀerence
data between two phases. We suspect that these oscillations are due to some standing waves in the system that
are small, O(5%), compared with the absolute angle drift so that they represent a small correction to our angle
estimate. Reducing this systematic oﬀset is currently under investigation and will be presented in future work.

Figure 9. a) A single resonator IQ circle measured via sweeping the probe tone in frequency across the resonance before
(dashed) and after (solid) the 7 hour night-to-day acquisition. The diﬀerence in the tangent to the circle (arrows) at the
resonance frequency (stars) is used to estimate the amount of phase shift driven by the cable over the 7 hour acquisition.
b) The estimate from the IQ circle (blue stars) is compared to the angle drift calculated from the ﬁt to the pilot tones
(orange stars) showing that applying feedback using the pilot tones would reduce the angle drift by ≥80%. The oscillation
in the blue data is suspected to be real and due to standing waves. The bias between the pilot tone and circle angle
estimates is under investigation.

Using the natural environmental temperature change of the room to induce phase drifts we see that: 1) our
estimate of the magnitude of thermal coupling of our cables was correct, 2) our assumption that the thermally
induced phase drifts in the cable were dominating our phase drifts was correct and 3) that we could use the pilot
tone method to track the phase drifts (up to the systematic oﬀset and oscillations discussed above).

6. CONTROLLED PHASE INJECTION

After validating our assumptions about thermal coupling and our ability to monitor cable phase shown in
section 5 we implemented an analog phase shifter to explore our ability to monitor and clean phase drifts over a
controllable range of amplitudes and modulation rates. We used the RF-Lambda RVPT0408GAC analog phase
shifter which produces a phase drift linearly proportional to the input voltage. To control the phase shifter we
connected the analog voltage control pins to a Keysight 33250A function generator through a protection diode
to prevent reverse biasing the phase shifter. The voltage controlled phase shifter measurement setup is shown in
the left blue option for phase drift injection in ﬁgure 1.

6.1 Cleaning Phase Drift Contamination

To demonstrate our ability to use pilot tones to clean the contamination in the resonator readout channels due
to the varying cable delay we input into a phase shifter a 10 mHz sine wave with a phase delay amplitude of ∼30
deg peak-to-peak and then acquire data with both the pilot tones and tracked resonator channels co-sampled
at 200 Hz for 40 minutes. We then set the function generator sine wave modulation oﬀ and stream data for an
additional 40 minutes to obtain a baseline.

The cleaning is implemented here with an SVD algorithm. We take the data sized N × T where N is the
number of channels and includes both the tracked resonator channels as well as the pilot tone channels and T is

the number of time samples and perform a singular value decomposition:15

SN ×T = WN ×KMK×T

(5)

Here W is the weights matrix size N × K where K is the number of eigenmodes of the signal covariance matrix
and M is the modes matrix. To get W and M we must ﬁrst solve for the eigenvalues of the covariance matrix
of the signal:

Cov[S] = WEWT

(6)

We get the weights W directly as the eigenvectors and construct the modes M = WTS. The modes represent
a correlated signal in the time ordered data seen between many channels, while the weights scale that signal for
each channel. The modes are sorted in order of strength. In our case, since all channels see the phase signal
with correlation near 100% across the pilot tone channels and the amplitude of that signal is much larger than
the resonator-demodulated phase signal, the principle component (or ﬁrst mode) that is picked out is the signal
correlated with the phase modulation. Alternatively, instead of just picking out the ﬁrst mode we could choose
the mode (or combination of modes) that minimizes the pilot tone channel signal only and use that mode for
cleaning. In our lab testing with resonators uncoupled to detectors there are very few other correlated noise
sources, so we always found the principle component to be dominated by the pilot tone signal. We can then
remove this mode from the resonator channels to clean the contamination as shown in ﬁgure 10.

Figure 10. (Top) Single pilot tone channel with feedback oﬀ showing that it is following the 10 mHz phase modulation
with a high signiﬁcance, a single resonator time stream (center) and amplitude spectral density (bottom) for 40 minutes
with the phase modulation on (blue) and oﬀ (orange) and with the phase modulation contamination cleaned from the
blue curve using singular value decomposition (green).

The green curve in the center and bottom plots of ﬁgure 10 compared the the orange curve shows the quality
of our data cleaning. The time ordered data look nearly identical; however, one can see in the amplitude spectral

density (ASD) that the odd harmonics of the 10 mHz injected signal appear to be cleaned better. There is also
slightly diﬀerent amounts of power in the lowest (poorly sampled) bins of the ASD, likely due to the SVD also
cleaning some of the low frequency phase drift induced by the temperature drift in the room (and 1.6 mHz chiller
cycle) discussed in section 5. This demonstrates cleaning at a single phase injection amplitude and frequency
however, for future work we plan to expand this to a range of frequencies and amplitudes to investigate over
what parameter space this method is eﬀective.

7. CONCLUSION

We show that the phase drifts in our microwave SQUID multiplexer optimized for CMB applications are domi-
nated by ambient temperature drifts coupling to our room temperature coaxial cables and that we can eﬀectively
monitor these phase drifts using a set of pilot tones set to frequencies where there are no resonances. Follow-up
studies are required to identify and minimize the systematic oﬀset between the angle shift calculated from the
pilot tones and derived from the tangent vector to the S21 resonance circle. However, we show contamination of
the resonator channels from the cable delay variation and a post processing cleaning that largely removes this
contamination using an SVD.

This is an important demonstration for next generation experiments that require extremely tight control
of low-frequency correlated noise such as B-mode CMB surveys. Many resonator readout techniques could
beneﬁt from pilot tones because they oﬀer a very clean measurement of the system phase drift independent
of the resonator signal without adding any system noise. In the future we plan to use these monitoring tones
to implement an active feedback in which the probe tone calibration phase is periodically adjusted over a
timestream based on the calculated phase drifts from the pilot tones. Additionally, we plan to explore the data
cleaning method presented here over a wide range of amplitudes and frequencies to evaluate the method for use
in astronomical observatories such as cosmological B-mode searches, where control of low frequency noise and
signal injection around particular modulator frequencies (i.e. half-wave plate or variable phase modulator) are
particularly important for the ﬁnal science data products.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

MSF was supported in part by the Department of Energy Oﬃce of Science Graduate Student Research (SCGSR)
Program. The SCGSR program is administered by the Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education (ORISE)
for the DOE, which is managed by ORAU under contract number DE-SC0014664.

REFERENCES

[1] Bennett, D. A., Mates, J. A. B., Bandler, S. R., Becker, D. T., Fowler, J. W., Gard, J. D., Hilton, G. C.,
Irwin, K. D., Morgan, K. M., Reintsema, C. D., Sakai, K., Schmidt, D. R., Smith, S. J., Swetz, D. S., Ullom,
J. N., Vale, L. R., and Wessels, A. L., “Microwave SQUID multiplexing for the Lynx x-ray microcalorimeter,”
Journal of Astronomical Telescopes, Instruments, and Systems 5(2), 1 – 10 (2019).

[2] Cecil, T., Miceli, A., Gades, L., Datesman, A., Quaranta, O., Yefremenko, V., Novosad, V., and Mazin, B.,
“Kinetic inductance detectors for x-ray spectroscopy,” Physics Procedia 37, 697–702 (2012). Proceedings of
the 2nd International Conference on Technology and Instrumentation in Particle Physics (TIPP 2011).
[3] McCarrick, H., Healy, E., Ahmed, Z., Arnold, K., Atkins, Z., Austermann, J. E., Bhandarkar, T., Beall,
J. A., Bruno, S. M., Choi, S. K., Connors, J., Cothard, N. F., Crowley, K. D., Dicker, S., Dober, B., Duell,
C. J., Duﬀ, S. M., Dutcher, D., Frisch, J. C., Galitzki, N., Gralla, M. B., Gudmundsson, J. E., Henderson,
S. W., Hilton, G. C., Ho, S.-P. P., Huber, Z. B., Hubmayr, J., Iuliano, J., Johnson, B. R., Kofman, A. M.,
Kusaka, A., Lashner, J., Lee, A. T., Li, Y., Link, M. J., Lucas, T. J., Lungu, M., Mates, J. A. B., McMahon,
J. J., Niemack, M. D., Orlowski-Scherer, J., Seibert, J., Silva-Feaver, M., Simon, S. M., Staggs, S., Suzuki,
A., Terasaki, T., Thornton, R., Ullom, J. N., Vavagiakis, E. M., Vale, L. R., Lanen, J. V., Vissers, M. R.,
Wang, Y., Wollack, E. J., Xu, Z., Young, E., Yu, C., Zheng, K., and Zhu, N., “The simons observatory
microwave SQUID multiplexing detector module design,” The Astrophysical Journal 922, 38 (nov 2021).

[4] Duell, C. J., Vavagiakis, E. M., Austermann, J., Chapman, S. C., Choi, S. K., Cothard, N. F., Dober, B.,
Gallardo, P., Gao, J., Groppi, C., Herter, T. L., Stacey, G. J., Huber, Z., Hubmayr, J., Johnstone, D., Li,
Y., Mauskopf, P., McMahon, J., Niemack, M. D., Nikola, T., Rossi, K., Simon, S., Sinclair, A. K., Vissers,
M., Wheeler, J., and Zou, B., “CCAT-prime: Designs and status of the ﬁrst light 280 GHz MKID array
and mod-cam receiver,” in [Millimeter, Submillimeter, and Far-Infrared Detectors and Instrumentation for
Astronomy X ], Zmuidzinas, J. and Gao, J.-R., eds., 11453, 235 – 243, International Society for Optics and
Photonics, SPIE (2020).

[5] Nakada, N., Hattori, K., Nakashima, Y., Hirayama, F., Yamamoto, R., Yamamori, H., Kohjiro, S., Sato, A.,
Takahashi, H., and Fukuda, D., “Microwave squid multiplexer for readout of optical transition edge sensor
array,” Journal of Low Temperature Physics 199, 206–211 (Apr 2020).

[6] Walter, A. B., Fruitwala, N., Steiger, S., Bailey, J. I., Zobrist, N., Swimmer, N., Lipartito, I., Smith, J. P.,
Meeker, S. R., Bockstiegel, C., Coiﬀard, G., Dodkins, R., Szypryt, P., Davis, K. K., Daal, M., Bumble,
B., Collura, G., Guyon, O., Lozi, J., Vievard, S., Jovanovic, N., Martinache, F., Currie, T., and Mazin,
B. A., “The MKID exoplanet camera for subaru SCExAO,” Publications of the Astronomical Society of the
Paciﬁc 132, 125005 (nov 2020).

[7] Day, P. K., LeDuc, H. G., Mazin, B. A., Vayonakis, A., and Zmuidzinas, J., “A broadband superconducting

detector suitable for use in large arrays,” Nature 425(6960), 817–821 (2003).

[8] Mates, J. A. B., The Microwave SQUID Multiplexer, PhD thesis (2011).
[9] Henderson, S. W., Ahmed, Z., Austermann, J., Becker, D., Bennett, D. A., Brown, D., Chaudhuri, S., Cho,
H.-M. S., D’Ewart, J. M., Dober, B., Duﬀ, S. M., Dusatko, J. E., Fatigoni, S., Frisch, J. C., Gard, J. D.,
Halpern, M., Hilton, G. C., Hubmayr, J., Irwin, K. D., Karpel, E. D., Kernasovskiy, S. S., Kuenstner, S. E.,
Kuo, C.-L., Li, D., Mates, J. A. B., Reintsema, C. D., Smith, S. R., Ullom, J., Vale, L. R., Winkle, D. D. V.,
Vissers, M., and Yu, C., “Highly-multiplexed microwave SQUID readout using the SLAC Microresonator
Radio Frequency (SMuRF) electronics for future CMB and sub-millimeter surveys,” in [Millimeter, Sub-
millimeter, and Far-Infrared Detectors and Instrumentation for Astronomy IX], Zmuidzinas, J. and Gao,
J.-R., eds., 10708, 170 – 185, International Society for Optics and Photonics, SPIE (2018).

[10] Mates, J. A. B., Irwin, K. D., Vale, L. R., Hilton, G. C., Gao, J., and Lehnert, K. W., “Flux-ramp

modulation for squid multiplexing,” Journal of Low Temperature Physics 167, 707–712 (Jun 2012).

[11] Dober, B., Ahmed, Z., Arnold, K., Becker, D. T., Bennett, D. A., Connors, J. A., Cukierman, A., D’Ewart,
J. M., Duﬀ, S. M., Dusatko, J. E., Frisch, J. C., Gard, J. D., Henderson, S. W., Herbst, R., Hilton, G. C.,
Hubmayr, J., Li, Y., Mates, J. A. B., McCarrick, H., Reintsema, C. D., Silva-Feaver, M., Ruckman, L.,
Ullom, J. N., Vale, L. R., Van Winkle, D. D., Vasquez, J., Wang, Y., Young, E., Yu, C., and Zheng, K., “A
microwave squid multiplexer optimized for bolometric applications,” Applied Physics Letters 118(6), 062601
(2021).

[12] Sathyanarayana Rao, M., Silva-Feaver, M., Ali, A., Arnold, K., Ashton, P., Dober, B. J., Duell, C. J., Duﬀ,
S. M., Galitzki, N., Healy, E., Henderson, S., Ho, S.-P. P., Hoh, J., Kofman, A. M., Kusaka, A., Lee, A. T.,
Mangu, A., Mathewson, J., Mauskopf, P., McCarrick, H., Moore, J., Niemack, M. D., Raum, C., Salatino,
M., Sasse, T., Seibert, J., Simon, S. M., Staggs, S., Stevens, J. R., Teply, G., Thornton, R., Ullom, J.,
Vavagiakis, E. M., Westbrook, B., Xu, Z., and Zhu, N., “Simons observatory microwave squid multiplexing
readout: Cryogenic rf ampliﬁer and coaxial chain design,” Journal of Low Temperature Physics 199, 807–816
(May 2020).

[13] Carlisle Interconnect Technologies, “Cable dielectric minimizes phase change over temperature,” tech. rep.,

Microwave Journal (2020 [Online]).

[14] Technical Information, Gore United States, “Changes in insertion loss and phase,” tech. rep., W. L. Gore

& Associates, Inc., 555 Paper Mill Road, Newark, DE 19711 (2022 [Online]).

[15] Klema, V. and Laub, A., “The singular value decomposition: Its computation and some applications,” IEEE

Transactions on Automatic Control 25(2), 164–176 (1980).

