Rapid design space exploration of multi-clock domain 
MPSoCs with Hybrid Prototyping 

Ehsan Saboori 
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 
Concordia University 
Montreal, Canada 
e_saboo@encs.concordia.ca 

Samar Abdi 
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 
Concordia University 
Montreal, Canada 
samar@encs.concordia.ca 

Abstract—This  paper  presents  novel  techniques  of  using 
hybrid  prototyping  for  early  power-performance  analysis  of 
MPSoC  designs  with  multiple  clock  domains.  The  fundamental 
idea of  hybrid prototyping is to simulate a  design with  multiple 
cores  by  creating  an  emulation  kernel  in  software  on  top  of  a 
single  physical  instance  of  the  core.  However,  so  far  hybrid 
prototyping has been limited to homogeneous multicores running 
at  the  same  clock  frequency.  Moreover,  hybrid  prototyping has 
not yet been demonstrated for efficient design space exploration. 
Our  work  focuses  on  enhancing  the  capabilities  of  hybrid 
prototyping,  such  that  it  can  be  applied  to  realistic  multi-clock 
MPSoC  designs  as  well  to  perform  early  power-performance 
evaluation of MPSoC designs. Our experiments using industrial 
strength applications such as JPEG, MP3 and Packet Processing, 
demonstrate the high accuracy of our hybrid prototypes, and over 
two orders of magnitude improvement over software simulation 
speed.  We  also  demonstrate  that  exploring  over  150  design 
options using hybrid prototyping can be done with high reliability 
in  the  order  of  minutes  compared  to  multiple  days  using 
conventional FPGA prototyping. 

Keywords—Embedded  systems;  Rapid  prototyping;  MPSoC; 
Multicore design; Virtual prototyping; FPGA prototyping; Design 
space exploration 

INTRODUCTION 

increasingly  pervasive 

Multi-processor  System-on-Chip  (MPSoC)  platforms  are 
becoming 
in  modern  embedded 
systems.  System-level  modeling  techniques  have  enabled 
creation  of  fast  software  models  of  multicore  platforms, 
commonly  known  as  virtual  prototypes,  for  early  functional 
validation  of  embedded  software,  before  the  hardware  is 
available. Virtual platforms have the advantage of high-speed 
functional  simulation  and,  typically,  scale  well  with  the 
number of cores. However, they sacrifice timing accuracy for 
speed.  FPGA  prototypes  provide  cycle-accurate  performance 
estimation. However, it takes a significant amount of time to 
design,  implement  and  test  the  FPGA  design.  Hybrid 
prototyping  [1]  is  a  system-level  modeling  framework  that 
aims  to  provide  early,  fast,  and  cycle-accurate  models  of 
homogeneous  multi-cores.  Using  hybrid  prototyping, 
software  designers  can  create  concurrent 
embedded 
applications  and  accurately  analyze 
the  performance 
implication  of  their  optimizations  before  implementation.  At 
the  same  time,  hardware  architects  can  modify  the  platform 
model without having to do full FPGA prototyping. 

This work was funded by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research 
Council of Canada (NSERC) grant no. 386311-2010. 

In this paper, we enhance the hybrid prototyping system to 
simulate MPSoCs with multi-clock domains, which introduce 
heterogeneity of processing speed amongst the cores. We also 
introduce  methods  for  early  power  modeling  that  enables 
comprehensive  Design  Space  Exploration  (DSE)  of  MPSoC 
platforms using hybrid prototypes. By using our proposed DSE 
methods,  designers  can  evaluate  their  design  choices  during 
system  development.  Hybrid  prototyping  can  be  used  to 
implement a set of prototypes for different design choices. The 
set of prototypes can be compared using well defined metrics 
such as execution time, cost and energy consumption. 

In this paper, our primary goal with hybrid prototyping is to 
make DSE fast, early and reliable based on execution time and 
energy consumption metrics for MPSoCs. The contributions of 
this work are (i) timing estimation with multi-clock domains, 
(ii)  energy  consumption  estimation  and  (iii)  design  space 
exploration, using hybrid prototyping. 

  RELATED WORK 

technologies  based  on  binary 

Both  virtual  prototyping  and  FPGA-based  physical 
prototyping  have  been  a  topic  of  intense  research  with  the 
growing  adoption  of  multicore  architectures  and 
the 
corresponding  need  to  provide  early  simulation  models  to 
embedded  software  designers.  Amongst  the  software-based 
methods, the most successful developments have been virtual 
platform 
translation,  as 
commercialized by Windriver [2], Coware [3], and Xilinx XVP 
[4]. In most virtual platforms, host-compiled ISS have replaced 
or complemented traditional cycle-accurate micro-architecture 
simulators [5] [6] [7] [8]. Open Virtual Platform (OVP) is an 
open source virtual platform which uses OVPsim to simulate 
different designs. OVPsim is an instruction accurate simulator 
which provides infrastructure for describing platforms with one 
or  more  processors  containing  shared  memory  and  busses  in 
arbitrary topologies and peripheral models [9]. Such simulators 
can provide significant speedups (reaching simulation speeds 
of several hundred MIPS), but often focus on functionality and 
speed at the expense of limited or no timing accuracy. Another 
host-compiled  software  simulation  technique  is  based  on 
source level static delay annotation in the application [10] [11]. 
The delays are derived by analyzing the application execution 
on  an  abstract  model  of  the  core.  Although  source-level 
annotation  techniques  promise  high  simulation  speed,  they 
require  the  full  application  source,  including  source  of 

 
 
 
libraries.  These  techniques  also  use  an  abstract  core  model, 
leading to estimation inaccuracies. 

The RAMP platform puts together a large array of FPGAs 
in order to support the instantiation and integration of hundreds 
of cores [12] [13]. Unfortunately, the cost and design time of 
such full system prototypes is very high [14]. In addition, there 
is no flexibility of abstracting the inter-core communication in 
RAMP,  since  it  is  fixed  in  hardware  by  the  inter-FPGA 
communication  architecture.  Another  FPGA-based  modeling 
approach implements the SystemC simulation kernel in FPGA 
to support standard hardware I/O during simulation [15]. Yet 
another  type  of  FPGA-assisted  simulation,  called  virtual  in-
circuit  emulation,  runs  software-on-host  and  application-
specific hardware on FPGA to avoid slow RTL simulation in 
software [16]. Both techniques are incremental improvements 
to cycle-accurate simulation and have not been shown to scale 
to large multicore designs. 

Hybrid  prototyping  technique  is  distinct  from  the  above 
approaches in that it time-multiplexes several virtual cores on 
a  single  physical  target  core.  The  core  and  the  additional 
simulation infrastructure can fit on a single FPGA chip, making 
it very cost effective in contrast to full system prototyping in 
FPGA. The MEK supports the execution of any multi-tasking 
ANSI C/C++ application in our proposed environment. 

  BACKGROUND ON HYBRID PROTOTYPING 

The fundamental idea of hybrid prototyping is to create a 
multicore emulation kernel (MEK) in software that executes on 
a  single  target  core  that  is  physically  implemented  in  FPGA 
[1].  Figure  1  shows  the  MEK  structure  in  grey.  The  lowest 
layer is the MEK data structure, consisting of tasks, events and 
the scheduling First-In-First-Out (FIFO) queue that keeps all 
the ready tasks. The next higher layer consists of the simulation 
primitives for the management of events and logical times for 
the tasks.  

Fig 1. The layered MEK structure for hybrid prototyping 

The  models  of  the  inter-core  communication  services  are 
implemented as an API on top of the simulation primitives. The 
architecture  is  modeled  using  task  creation  and  channel 
creation methods as shown. The application consists of the task 

functions  and  uses  the  communication  API  provided  by  the 
MEK. Since, hybrid prototyping depends on measurement of 
physical time, a hardware timer and its drivers are included. 

The MEK defines primitives for event management using 
basic notify/wait methods. It also defines an update method to 
manage  the  logical  times  of  the  emulated  cores.  The  logical 
time  for  a  core  is  the  time  until  which  the  core  has  been 
simulated.  The  context  switching  between  emulated  cores 
during simulation is done by  the context_switch  method that 
saves the context (program, stack pointers and registers) of the 
previous core and loads the context of the new Active core. A 
running core may yield the simulation priority by calling the 
yield  method.  Finally,  the  MEK  maintains  a  global  variable 
called MIN_SIM_TIME, which keeps the minimum logical time 
until which all cores have been simulated. 

  Timing estimation 
Since, hybrid prototyping depends on the measurement of 
physical  time,  a  hardware  timer  and  its  drivers  are  included. 
The MEK uses a hardware timer to measure the execution time 
in  CPU  cycles.  The  timer’s  value  is  used  to  manage  the 
emulated core’s logical time. It can be measured either in CPU 
cycles  or  real  execution  time  (in  milliseconds).  To  obtain 
execution time in millisecond, a clock frequency (f) should be 
assigned  to  each  emulated  core.  As  the  MEK  calculates  the 
execution time in CPU cycles, the real execution time can be 
easily obtained by multiplying the number of cycles with the 
clock period of each emulated core. 

𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒 𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑒𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚 =  CPU Cycles  ×  

Figure 2 shows how the MEK maintains the logical times 
lt1  and  lt2  on  emulated  cores  C1  and  C2  respectively.  It  is 
assumed that the length of the channel is only 1 item and C1 
and C2 are running with frequencies f1 and f2 respectively. 

𝑠𝑠 𝑓𝑓𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑒𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑓𝑓

1
𝑒𝑒𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒 𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑒

′

The MEK may pick either C1 or C2 to simulate first. Figure 
2 illustrates the case when C1 is picket by the MEK. The X-axis 
shows  the  physical  time  measured  by  the  hardware  timer  in 
CPU  cycles.  As  this  figure  shows,  the  MEK  runs  T1  on 
emulated core C1 until it reaches bread at time t11. Since no data 
is found in the channel, the MEK update the lt1 to t11 × f1, blocks 
T1 and switches to task T2. T2 runs for t21 unit, writes data into 
the channel then notifies event chev_write.  As a result, the 
MEK unblocks T1. Right after this notification, T2 executes for 
another  t22  unit.  Then,  it  tends  to  write  for  the  second  time. 
However, as there is no space in the channel, the MEK blocks 
T2, set the lt2 to (t21 + t22) × f2 and switches back to T1. T1 reads 
data  from  the  channel  and  notifies  event  chev_read. 
Considering this notification, the MEK unblocks T2. As T1 can 
execute  for  t12  unit  till  reaches  the  second  read  while  the 
channel is empty, the MEK sets lt2 to (t11 + t12) × f1 and switches 
to T2. When T2 writes into the channel, the MEK updates the 
lt1 to lt2‘s value. This happens because lt2 is bigger than lt1. T2, 
then, executes for t23 unit and terminates. The MEK switches 
back to T1. It reads from the channels, executes for t13 units and 
then terminates. At the end of the simulation, the MEK reports 
lt1 as (t21 + t22) × f2 + t13 × f1 and lt2 as (t21 + t22 + t23) × f2. 

 
 
 
 
Fig 2. The MEK timing estimation example with two running tasks 

0

T1

t11

T2

t21

bWrite (b)

bRead (b)
t12
bRead (b)
t13

t22

bWrite (b)

t23

C1

C2

EC

lt1 = t11 × f1

W

CS

T1

T2

lt1 = (t11 + t12) × f1

lt1 = (t21 + t22) × f2 + t13 × f1

lt2 = t21 × f2

lt2 = (t21+ t22) × f2

lt1 = (t21 + t22) × f2

lt2 = (t21 + t22 + t23) × f2

R

N

W

CS

R N

T

WR

N

CSW

WR

N

T

CS

t11

t21

t22

t12

t23

t13

Physical (wall clock) time

WR

write into channel

R read from channel

N notify channel’s event W wait on channel’s event

CS

Context Switch

T terminate

  ENERGY ESTIMATION 

The MEK provides the busy and idle time for each cores 
which are used for energy consumption estimation. On every 
logical time update after blocking, the difference between the 
new logical time and the task’s logical time indicates the idle 
time for the corresponding core. Figure 3 shows the busy time 
for tasks T1 and T2. In this case, when T1 notifies event e, the 
MEK  updates  T2’s  timestamp  to  t11  and  increases  T2’s  idle 
time by t11 – t21.  

dynamic  power  when  it  is  busy.  Since  different  mappings 
may  result  in  different  busy  times  for  the  cores,  we  can 
change  the  mapping  in  order  to  obtain  the  best  energy 
consumption  by  the  design.  Using  a  hybrid  prototype,  the 
designer can quickly obtain the busy times for the design with 
different operating frequencies and mappings. The estimated 
energy consumption for each emulated core can be calculated 
by the following equations. 

Fig 3. The busy time and idle time 

Energy =   (Idletime ×   Idlepower) + (busytime ×  busypower)

busypower =   CPU busypower
TABLE I.  

THE BUSY POWER CONSUMPTION FOR DIFFERENT CLOCK 

+   Memory busypower
DOMAINS 

Energy consumption is one of the most important quality 
metrics in embedded system design. The power consumption 
of a core is directly related to its frequency. Most embedded 
processors  support  several  operating  frequencies,  which 
allows  us  to  create  a  mixture  of  cores,  each  running  at  a 
different operating point. The busy power consumption is a 
measure of the power which is consumed by the core when it 
executes  the  instructions.  The  idle  power  consumption  is  a 
measure of the, largely  static, power consumed by the core 
while it  waits on external events, and does not execute any 
instruction.  We  used  the  Xilinx  XPower  analyzer  [4]  to 
measure both the busy and idle power consumptions. The idle 
dynamic power is zero for the Microblaze when it waits on 
the  FSL  communication  channels.  The  Static  power, 
consumed at all times irrespective of whether the core is busy 
or idle, is the same for all cores with different clock domains 
and  is  measured  to  be  1.48  mw.  If  the  clock  frequency  is 
increased, the power consumption  will increase as  well.  As 
CPU and memory are the most power consuming parts in our 
designs, we consider the busy power as sum of CPU power 
and memory power. Table I shows the average busy power 
for Microblaze and BRAM. 

A simplistic,  yet reasonably accurate, power  model of a 
processor assigns a single power consumption number to each 
operating  point.  Clearly,  the  processor  is  only  consuming 

Frequency  Microblaze 
07.14 mw 
12.23 mw 
14.65 mw 
16.00 mw 
23.24 mw 
31.91 mw 

25 MHz 
45 MHz 
55 MHz 
60 MHz 
90 MHz 
125 MHz 

BRAM 
14.57 mw 
25.68 mw 
30.80 mw 
34.01 mw 
50.65 mw 
68.91 mw 

  USE CASES 

To evaluate the speed and accuracy of hybrid prototypes, 
we  used  the  JPEG  encoder,  the  MP3  decoder  and  a  simple 
packet  forwarding  applications.  We  chose  the  Microblaze 
core  from  Xilinx  for  the  target  multicore  architectures  [4]. 
The  FIFO  communication  between  the  tasks  is  performed 
using  the  Fast  Simplex  Link  (FSL)  buses  supported  by 
Microblaze. 

  MP3 Decoder  
The MP3 decoder application reads and decodes data from 
the media file. The MP3 data is fetched from a file, and after 
being decoded it is written into a serial buffer. The buffered 
data can be played on the handset speaker. This application 
has  5  separate  tasks  which  can  be  run  on  different  cores: 
isrPulser  which  is  responsible  for  sending  pulse  in  proper 
time to task isr. Task isr is the interrupt handler that notifies 
the decoding task if more data is needed by the serial buffer 
for the speakers. Task audiosal which reads and decodes data 
from the media file. Task mixerctrl is in charge of the channel 
and task dspaudio converts the rate, playback, mix, etc. on the 
data. Figure 4 shows the MP3 decoder application.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 4. The MP3 decoder application 

inner-cores that can each be implemented as a Microblaze in 
FPGA prototype. The cores are connected using FSL as shown 
in Figure 5. 

Fig 5. Simple Packet forwarding application 

  Jpeg Encoder 
The  JPEG  encoder  consists  of  5  tasks:  Read  the  bitmap 
(Read),  Discrete  Cosine  Transform  (DCT),  Quantization  of 
values  (Quant),  ZigZag  transform  (ZigZag)  and  Huffman 
encoding (Huff). Each function consumes a frame, which is 
an 8×8 block of integers, processes it and passes the block to 
the  next  function. Given the  application structure, it can be 
easily pipelined and the concurrent tasks can be  mapped to 
different cores. We created 15 multicore designs of the JPEG 
encoder, ranging from 2 core to 5 cores. For each platform, 
we used different mappings from tasks to cores as shown in 
Table II. 

TABLE II.  

TASK MAPPINGS FOR THE JPEG ENCODER MULTICORE 

DESIGNS 

Design 
2a 
2b 
2c 
2d 
3a 
3b 
3c 
3d 
3e 
3f 
4a 

4b 

4c 

4d 

5 

#Cores  Mapping 

2 
2 
2 
2 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
4 

4 

4 

4 

5 

Read  mb1; DCT, Quant, ZigZag, Huff  mb2 
Read, DCT  mb1; Quant, ZigZag, Huff  mb2 
Read, DCT, Quant  mb1; ZigZag, Huff  mb2 
Read, DCT, Quant, ZigZag  mb1; Huff  mb2 
Read  mb1; DCT  mb2, Quant, ZigZag, Huff  mb3 
Read  mb1; DCT, Quant  mb2; ZigZag, Huff  mb3 
Read  mb1; DCT, Quant, ZigZag  mb2; Huff  mb3 
Read, DCT  mb1; Quant, ZigZag  mb2; Huff  mb3 
Read, DCT  mb1; Quant  mb2; ZigZag, Huff  mb3 
Read, DCT, Quant  mb1; ZigZag  mb2; Huff  mb3 
Read  mb1; DCT  mb2; Quant  mb3; ZigZag, Huff 
 mb4 
Read  mb1; DCT  mb2; Quant, ZigZag  mb3; Huff 
  mb4 
Read  mb1; DCT, Quant  mb2; ZigZag  mb3; Huff 
 mb4 
Read, Quant  mb1; DCT  mb2; ZigZag  mb3; Huff 
 mb4 
Read  mb1; Quant  mb2; DCT  mb3; ZigZag  
mb4; Huff  mb5 

  Packet forwarding application 
The JPEG encoder and the MP3 decoder can be run on a 
design  with  maximum  number  of  5  cores.  However,  to 
evaluate the overhead of the hybrid prototyping and also to 
show its scalability, we need an application that can be run on 
a large number of cores simultaneously. A packet forwarding 
application  would  be  an  ideal  choice  for  this  purpose. 
Therefore,  a  simple  application  has  been  implemented  in 
order  to  process  packets.  The  application  has  a  dispatcher 
responsible for reading packets and distributing them among 
the  inner-cores.  The  inner-cores  execute  packet  processing 
tasks  and  send  the  processed  packets  to  the  collector.  The 
collector receives all packets and puts them in a proper order. 
This application can be implemented with a large number of 

  EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 

We created a FPGA prototype, a hybrid prototype and a 
virtual prototype for different designs for JPEG encoder, MP3 
decoder  and  packet  forwarding  applications.  All  the  used 
Microblaze cores are clocked at 125 MHz. Each Microblaze 
core in the FPGA prototypes has 64 KB of dedicated Block 
RAM (BRAM) for program and data. The hybrid prototypes 
use a single Microblaze core with 64 KB of BRAM since all 
the  tasks  and  the  MEK  fit  in  a  single  BRAM.  For  larger 
programs, one may create multiple instances of BRAMs with 
contiguous address space assignment. OVP is used to create 
the  virtual  prototypes.  As  OVP  is  an  instruction  accurate 
simulator,  it  only  calculates  the  number  of  instructions  and 
cannot  measure  the  idle  time.  Therefore,  the  busy  time  for 
each core is the sole result that can be provided by the OVP. 

  Speed 
Figure 6 shows speed comparison between hybrid, FPGA 
and  virtual  prototypes  to  execute  the  JPEG  encoder  for  a 
given image. The X-axis is the number of cores and the Y-
axis is the simulation time in milliseconds. The real execution 
time  can  easily  be  obtained  by  multiplying  the  number  of 
cycles with the clock period of 8 ns (125 MHz).  

Fig  6.  Prototyping  speed  comparison  between  FPGA,  hybrid  and  OVP 
prototypes for the JPEG encoder 

As we can see, in the most complex design with 5 cores, 
the  hybrid  prototype  took  382  ms  to  simulate  the  JPEG 
encoder. On the other hand, the FPGA prototype took 35. In 
contrast,  the  virtual  prototyping  using  OVP  took  over  18 
seconds on a 2GHz Pentium host with 8GB of RAM. 

Figure  7  shows  the  speed  comparison  between  hybrid, 
forwarding 
FPGA  and  OVP  prototypes 
application. The X-axis is the number of cores used in each 
design and the Y-axis is the simulation time in milliseconds. 
Up  to  eight  Microblazes  can  be  used  on  the  FPGA  due  to 
Microblaze Debug Module (MDM) restriction. MDM can be 
connected to the maximum of eight Microblazes at the same 

for  packet 

 
 
 
 
 
 
time. Therefore, FPGA prototypes can be implemented with 
only up to eight cores. As it shows, in the design with eight 
cores, the FPGA prototype took 11 ms to execute, while the 
hybrid prototypes took 131 ms to emulate the application. In 
contrast, the OVP took 26 seconds to simulate the design. 

Fig  7.  Prototyping  speed  comparison  between  FPGA,  hybrid  and  OVP 
prototypes for Packet forwarding application 

The FPGA prototype took 33M cycles (264 ms) to execute 
the  MP3  decoder  while  the  hybrid  prototype  took  47.25M 
cycles (378 ms) to emulate it and OVP took about 28 second 
to simulate the design. Figure 6 and 7 show that the hybrid 
prototype emulation time increases linearly when the number 
of cores are being increased. 

  Accuracy 
Figure 8 shows the busy time reported by FPGA, Hybrid 
and  virtual  prototypes  for  each  core  for  all  15  different 
designs mentioned in table II. The X-axis shows the designs 
and  Y-axis  shows  the  execution  time  in  million  cycles  for 
each design. 

Fig 8. The busy times for FPGA, hybrid and Virtual prototypes for the JPEG 
encoder 

FPGA Prototypes

Hybrid Prototypes

OVP

12

10

s
e
l
c
y
c
n
o

i
l
l
i

M

8

6

4

2

0

2a

2b

2c

2d

3a

3b

3c

3d
3e
designs

3f

4a

4b

4c

4d

5

Both FPGA and hybrid prototypes were created for packet 
forwarding  application.  As  it  was  mentioned  earlier,  up  to 
eight  Microblazes  can  be  used  on  the  FPGA  due  to  MDM 
restriction. However, as there is no such limitation in hybrid 
prototypes,  as  they  use  a  single  Microblaze,  the  hybrid 
prototypes can be easily implemented for designs with more 
than 8 cores. Figure 9 illustrates the results for designs with 
up to 8 cores. The X-axis shows the number of cores and Y-
axis  shows  the  execution  time  in  million  cycles  for  each 
design. 

Fig 9. Packet forwarding application execution time for all designs with up 
to 8 cores 

10
8
6
4
2
0

s
e
l
c
y
c
n
o

i
l
l
i

M

3

4

FPGA Prototypes

Hybrid Prototypes

5

6

7

8

number of cores

The MP3 decoder has only one design with 5 cores. Table 
III shows the results for FPGA, hybrid and virtual prototypes 
of the MP3 decoder.  

TABLE III.  

THE MP3 DECODER EXECUTION TIME IN CPU CYCLES 

Core 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

execution time 

FPGA 
312467571 

Hybrid 
31250217 

Accuracy 

99.98 % 

Busy time ratio 
FPGA  Hybrid  OVP 
96% 
100% 
100% 

32890978 

32719520 

99.47 % 

33058711 

32908133 

99.54 % 

32972069 

32839963 

99.59 % 

32962442 

32780419 

99.44 % 

22% 

28% 

17% 

14% 

23% 

28% 

17% 

14% 

0% 

26% 

5% 

45% 

To  evaluate  hybrid  prototypes  with  multiple  clock 
domains  we also created both hybrid and FPGA prototypes 
for the MP3 decoder and the JPEG encoder by running each 
emulated core with different clock frequencies (60, 90, 25, 45 
and  55  MHz).  Table  IV  contains  the  results  for  the  MP3 
decoder.  

TABLE IV.   MP3 DECODER RESULTS WITH MULTIPLE CLOCK DOMAINS 

Core 

Clock 

1 
2 

3 

4 

5 

60 MHz 
90 MHz 

25 MHz 

45 MHz 

55 MHz 

execution time 

FPGA 
518.69a 
559.1 

560.7 

560.1 

560.0 

Hybrid 
520.83 
560.8 

566.0 

563.3 

561.9 

Accuracy 

99.58 % 
99.69 % 

99.06 % 

99.43 % 

99.66 % 

Busy time ratio 

FPGA  Hybrid 
100% 
100% 
14% 
14% 

43% 

22% 

15% 

43% 

22% 

15% 

a. The time unit is milliseconds. 

Figure 10 shows the results for all 15 designs mentioned 
in  table  II  for  the  JPEG  encoder.  The  X-axis  shows  the 
designs and Y-axis shows the execution time in million cycles 
for each design. 

Fig 10. The execution times for FPGA and hybrid prototypes for the JPEG 
encoder with multiple clock domains 

FPGA Prototype

Hybrid Prototype

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

s
e
l
c
y
c
n
o

i
l
l
i

M

2a

2b

2c

2d

3a

3b

3d
3c
designs

3e

3f

4a

4b

4c

4d

5

As it  was described earlier, all the inner cores in packet 
forwarding application are doing same processing, therefore, 
there would be no point to use multiple clock domains for it. 

Based on the experimental results, the hybrid prototypes 
reported the same number of cycles for each task as measured 
by the FPGA prototypes. This is because the hybrid prototype 
executes the tasks on the same core as in the FPGA prototype. 
In  contrast,  because  of  the  high  abstraction  level  of  the 
underlying ISS, OVP simulation had an error of over 25% in 
the  number of cycles reported. Furthermore, OVP can only 
report  busy  time  for  each  core  because  it  is  an  instruction 
accurate simulator. Therefore, hybrid prototype was shown to 
be more reliable than abstract virtual prototypes.  

  Modeling Effort 
Modeling effort is a difficult metric to measure because of 
the  human  element.  In  creating  our  experimental  setup,  we 
found it was very difficult to debug the FPGA prototypes as 
the number of cores increased. We used a JTAG based debug 
module provided in the Xilinx Embedded Development Kit. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The  I/O  from  the  different  cores  was  sent  to  the  hyper-
terminal  on  the  host.  In  the  case  of  multiple  cores,  it  was 
difficult to sort through the debug messages from the different 
cores. In the hybrid prototype, we had to interface with only 
one core, and the state of the core being emulated was easily 
observed at any given time. In summary, we found it much 
more  challenging  to  implement  and  validate  the  FPGA 
prototypes than the hybrid ones. 

  DESIGN SPACE EXPLORATION 

For a given application and architecture, there are several 
possible  mappings.  Different  mappings  are  created  and 
evaluated as per the chosen quality metrics. Eventually, the 
designer  can  select  the  best  design  amongst  the  evaluated 
mappings.  We  consider  execution 
time  and  energy 
consumption as quality metrics for DSE.  

For each design, the hybrid prototype provides a simple 
energy consumption model and a highly accurate estimation 
of  the  application’s  execution  time.  The  timing  estimations 
are generated for both total execution time and busy time for 
each core. In a given multicore design, the longest execution 
time  amongst  all  tasks  (mapped  to  different  cores)  can  be 
considered  as  the  design’s  total  execution  time.  So  by 
comparing the total task execution times on all cores, we can 
determine the speed of a multi-core design.  

Fig 11. Speed vs. Energy consumption for 162 possible designs for the JPEG 
encoder with 2 clock domains 

Our  experiments  with  the  hybrid  prototyping  system 
demonstrate  its  applicability  to  fast  multicore  design  space 
exploration. Embedded system designers have several design 
choices based on the number of cores, their configuration, and 
the  mapping  of  the  application  tasks  to  those  cores.  For 
instance,  there  are  16  possible  designs  with  only  1  clock 
domain while there are 14406 different possible designs with 
6 clock domains. By increasing the number of clock domains, 
the  number  of  possible  designs  increases  dramatically. 
Therefore, it is impractical to implement all these designs and 
choose  the  best  one.  We  have  modeled  the  162  possible 
designs of the JPEG encoder which is being run with 2 clock 
domains (60 and 125 MHz). Xilinx Virtual Platform (XVP) 
simulation shows errors of over 40% in the number of cycles 
reported  because  of  its  high  abstraction  level.  The  FPGA 
prototype takes 35ms to execute and 15 minutes to synthesize 
every design choice. Therefore, full FPGA prototyping takes 
almost  40  hours  for  all  162  possible  designs  without 
considering  the  effort  of  creating  the  FPGA  prototypes.  In 
contrast to the above techniques, it takes only 15 minutes to 
synthesize the hybrid platform’s target core, which is a one-
time effort. The hybrid prototype takes 382ms (in worst case) 
to emulate each design, thereby enabling extremely fast, early 

and reliable design space exploration. Figure 11 plots speed 
vs. energy consumption reported by the hybrid prototypes for 
all 162 designs which each spot presents a design. The circle 
highlights the best designs that consume minimal energy and 
shortest execution time.  

  CONCLUSION 

In  this  paper  we  have  presented  enhancement  to  hybrid 
prototyping  such  that  it  can  applied  to  design  space 
exploration of realistic  multi-clock domain MPSoCs. Using 
hybrid  prototypes,  MPSoC  designers  can  create  concurrent 
the  power  and 
applications  and  accurately  analyze 
performance  implication  of  their  optimizations  before  the 
hardware  is  available.  As  such,  the  hybrid  prototyping  was 
proven  capable  of  fast  and  early  MPSoC  design  space 
exploration.  MPSoC  architects  can  optimize  the  hardware 
architecture without having to do full system prototyping. In 
the future, we will extend the hybrid prototyping approach to 
support  MPSoCs  comprised  of  processors  with  different 
to  support  fully 
instruction-set  architectures 
heterogeneous MPSoC design. 

in  order 

REFERENCES 

[1]     E. Saboori, and S. Abdi, “Hybrid Prototyping of Multicore 

Embedded Systems”, in DATE, Grenoble, France 2013, vol., no., pp 
1627 - 1630, 2013 

[2]     «Wind River Simics,» Available: 

http://www.windriver.com/products/simics/. 

[3]     «Coware Platform Studio,» Available: 
http://www.synopsys.com/Tools/SLD/. 

[4]     X. E. D. Kit. [En ligne]. Available: http://www.xilinx.com/edk. 
[5]     F.  Bellard,  «QEMU,  a  Fast  and  Portable  Dynamic  Translator,» 
Proceedings of the Annual Conference on USENIX Annual Technical 
Conference, Berkeley, CA, USA, 2005.  

[6]     M. Reshadi, P. Mishra et N. Dutt, «Hybrid-compiled Simulation: An 
Efficient  Technique  for  Instruction-set  Architecture  Simulation,» 
ACM Trans. Embed. Comput. Syst., vol. 8, n° %13, pp. 20:1--20:27, 
2009.  

[7]     G. Braun, A. Nohl, A. Hoffmann, O. Schliebusch, R. Leupers et H. 
Meyr,  «A  universal  technique  for  fast  and  flexible  instruction-set 
architecture simulation,» IEEE TCAD, vol. 23, no. 12, pp. 1625-1639, 
Dec 2004.  

[8]     W. S. Mong et J. Zhu, «DynamoSim: a trace-based dynamically 

compiled instruction set simulator,» IEEE/ACM ICCAD-2004 

[9]     «Open Virtual Platforms,» Available: http://www.ovpworld.org/. 
[10]     Y.  Hwang,  S.  Abdi  et  D.  Gajski,  «Cycle-approximate  Retargetable 

Performance Estimation at the Transaction Level,» DATE 2008.  

[11]     Z. Wang et A. Herkersdorf, «An efficient approach for system-level 
timing simulation of compiler-optimized embedded software,» DAC 
2009.  

[12]     C.  Chang,  J.  Wawrzynek  et  R.  Brodersen,  «BEE2:  a  high-end 
reconfigurable computing system,» Design Test of Computers, IEEE, 
vol. 22, no12, pp. 114-125, March 2005.  

[13]     J. Wawrzynek, D. Patterson, M. Oskin, S.-L. Lu, C. Kozyrakis, J. Hoe, 
D. Chiou et K. Asanovic, «RAMP: Research Accelerator for Multiple 
Processors,» IEEE Micro, vol. 27, no. 12, pp. 46-57, March 2007.  

[14]     E.  S.  Chung  et  al.,  «ProtoFlex:  Towards  Scalable,  Full-System 
Multiprocessor  Simulations  Using  FPGAs,»  ACM  Trans. 
Reconfigurable Technol. Syst., vol. 2, no. 12, pp. 15:1--15:32, 2009.  

[15]     S. S. Sirowy, B. Miller et F. Vahid, «Portable SystemC-on-a-chip,» 

IEEE/ACM ISSS-CODES 2009.  

[16]     L. Benini, D. Bruni, N. Drago, F. Fummi et M. Poncino, «Virtual in-
circuit  emulation  for  timing  accurate  system  prototyping,»  IEEE 
ASIC/SOC Conference, 2002.  

 
 
 
