Half-Empty Offices in Flexible Work Arrangements: 
Why are Employees Not Returning? 

Darja Smite2,1, Nils Brede Moe 1,2, Anastasiia Tkalich1 , Geir Kjetil Hanssen1,      
Kristina Nydal1, Jenny Nøkleberg Sandbæk1, Hedda Wasskog Aamo1, Ada Olsdatter 
Hagaseth1, Scott Aleksander Bekke1, and Malin Holte1 

1 SINTEF Digital, Trondheim, Norway  
2 Blekinge Institute of Technology, Karlskrona, Sweden 

Abstract. Although the pandemic times of the world-wide forced working from 
home seem to be in the past, many knowledge workers choose to continue work-
ing predominantly from home as a partial or permanent practice. Related studies 
show that employees of companies from various industries, diverse in size and 
location, prefer to alter working in the office with working at home, coined as 
hybrid or flexible working arrangements. As a result, the post-pandemic times 
are associated with empty offices, confused managers and organizational leaders 
not knowing what to do with the often-expensive rental contracts. In this paper, 
we investigate the employee presence in the offices in two software companies 
and dive deeper into the reasons behind the preferences to work remotely, prac-
tices that help to attract employees back into the offices and, in cases when this 
is not possible, the ways companies can repurpose the office space for the future 
needs of their employees. The latter are based on the qualitative analysis of in-
terviews and survey responses. Our findings suggest that since the fall 2021 the 
offices were half-empty and that, on average, the daily office presence varies be-
tween 15-30%. The reasons for working remotely include behavioural and prac-
tical motivations, as well as factors related to office equipment and facilities, and 
the nature of the work tasks. Finally, we discuss the practical implications of our 
findings on the future work arrangements. 

Keywords: Remote work, Work from home, WFH, Hybrid workplace, Offices, 
Project management. 

1 

Introduction  

The forced work from home (WFH) during the pandemic in many software companies 
demonstrated that perceived productivity not only remains stable, but in some cases 
improves [1]. As a result of the more positive than expected experiences with remote 
working, many employees choose to continue working from home if not full time, than 
at least part-time, altering the days of office presence with days working from home 
[2], which is often referred to as hybrid model or flexible work arrangements [3]. As 

2 

the offices remain half-empty (or hardly occupied) even after the reopening of the so-
cieties, there is a growing realization that flexible work arrangements are here to stay, 
marked as a work-life shift [3] or a revolution of telework [4]. 

While there are many benefits of working from home [2, 5, 6], remote communica-
tion weakens the connection between colleagues [7, 8] and makes non-verbal signals 
harder to notice, even in video meetings [9]. This significantly complicates the team 
managers’ job, which often depends on the ability to observe, and communicate in-the-
moment feedback with team members, engage in conversations and debate [3]. Evi-
dently, this is not only about the Tayloristic managers who rely on the management 
style of command and control, but equally about the Participative and Supportive lead-
ership styles prevalent in agile environments. Besides, continual face-to-face interac-
tions are said to be important for commitment, assistance and collaboration, knowledge 
sharing [9]. Similarly innovation is dependent on face-to-face contact with customers 
and colleagues, who may generate ideas in planned and spontaneous brainstorming ses-
sions and conversations [3]. These types of cooperation often find place in the hallways, 
by the coffee machines, water coolers, copiers or between meetings [3, 9]. It is evident 
that  the  question  of  attracting  the  employees  back  into  the  offices  is  of  crucial  im-
portance, but how to achieve this in the times when even onboarding is performed re-
motely and the degree of flexibility offered by the company becomes the make-or-break 
point for many job seekers? What are the reasons for the shift from predominantly on-
site work mode to close to entirely remote working? Motivated by the hybrid future 
challenges, in this paper, we seek to answer the following research questions: 

RQ1: How often are employees present in the office? 
RQ2: What hinders and what motivates employees to visit the office? 

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we outline the background 
and motivation for our study. Section 3 details the methodology and describes the em-
pirical cases. In Section 4 we share our findings. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper 
with responses to our research questions discussed in the light of related work, impli-
cations of our findings and future work directions. 

2 

Background 

A growing number of organizations are implementing the flexible work arrangements 
for their employees, including Google, Telenor, Microsoft, and Spotify. Further, a large 
amount of research studying WFH have concluded that remote work per se does not 
hinder software engineers [10] and thus argues that hybrid work is here to stay, and will 
likely be the default work arrangement for software engineering in the future [1, 4, 6, 
11].  However,  little  literature  has  attempted  to  predict  how  flexible  arrangements 
should be performed in practice.  

Researchers have reported more effective individual task solving and work coordi-
nation from the home office. Reasons include better focus time, fewer interruptions, 
more time to complete work, more efficient meetings, and a better/more comfortable 

 
 
3 

work environment [5, 12]. Smite et al. [1] found fewer distractions and interruptions, 
increased  flexibility  to  organize  ones  work  hours,  and  easier  access  to  developers  a 
person depends on to complete the work. Ford et al. [5] report that not having to spend 
time commuting and having a more flexible schedule contributed to a better work-life 
balance. 

On the other hand, there are clear weaknesses of working in isolation from the office 
and the colleagues. While individual tasks are solved more effectively, tasks that re-
quire coordination suffer and new tasks that require brainstorming are not easy to per-
form virtually [1]. Santos and Ralph [6] studied the implications of remote coordination 
when  co-located  teams  work  exclusively  from  home.  They  found  that  the  needs  for 
coordination increase when working remotely since group cohesion and communica-
tion were impaired by working from home. Santos and Ralph [6] worry that these chal-
lenges will persist in hybrid work and that hybrid teams may undermine agile processes. 
Smite et al. [1] identified weakened socialization and informal communication, team 
cohesion, problem-solving, and knowledge sharing as challenges posed by WFH. They 
argue that ”office-home” mixes are likely to increase these challenges. It is further pre-
dicted that information will likely circulate in the office without sufficiently reaching 
those who work from home [1]. 

In contrast with the short-term gains of productivity during the pandemic, companies 
are concerned about the alienation of colleagues and weakening of the knowledge net-
works as the employees continue working remotely [7]. Thus, some companies are in-
troducing work policies that restrict the flexibility and constrain the number of days for 
working  remotely,  or  introduce  mandatory  office  days  [13].  However,  in  practice, 
forced office presence can backfire with increased attrition levels. This is evident in a 
study that shows that 40% of employees who currently work from home, even if only 
one day a week, would seek another job if employers require a full return to the office 
[2]. Thus there is a growing interest in research that would shed light on the reasons 
why employees prefer to work remotely and what can change their motivation to return 
to the office.  

3  Methodology 

This paper presents a multiple-case holistic study [14], in which we study one phenom-
enon in two companies. The goal of this research is to understand whether we shall 
expect employees of software companies to return to the traditional work in the office, 
how occupied are the offices after the post-pandemic reopening of the society in Nor-
way and what are the factors that influence the individual choices of the employees to 
work in the office or continue working remotely. Therefore, we collected data from two 
companies,  Knowit  and  Sparebank  1  Dev,  developing  software-intensive  products, 
sending their employees to work from home during the pandemic, and reopening their 
offices in fall 2021 with an episodic WFH advice during winter 2022. The choice of the 
companies was driven by convenience sampling, i.e., both companies are a part of an 
ongoing  research  project  and  had  readily  available  data  that  helps  to  answer  our  re-
search questions. Further, both companies are known as mature agile companies that 

4 

are leading in experimenting with new practices and methods. As we both know the 
companies from before and they have mature development processes, we reduce the 
possibility of internal challenges and problems affecting developers’ preferences for 
office use. Besides, both companies reported concerns regarding the return of the em-
ployees to the office work (case selection predicts similar results [ref to Yin]), which 
made them excellent candidates for our study with the opportunity for complementary 
findings that work together to enrich our understanding of the implications of the flex-
ible work arrangements on the office presence. In the following, we outline the study 
context, and explain our data collection and analysis procedures. 

3.1 

Study context 

Knowit is a large IT consultancy company with a large presence in the Nordic coun-
tries, but also other parts of Europe. The focus of this study was Knowit Objectnet, a 
subsidiary  with  approximately  175  consultants,  where  the  main  office  is  located  in 
Oslo. In April 2022 they moved to brand new offices in downtown Oslo, the capital of 
Norway. The new office no longer offers a free parking for the employees. Consultants 
are mostly working for clients, often at the client site, but they may also work from 
home, or from the main Oslo office which was completely re-built and opened during 
the spring of 2022. As an HR manager from Knowit explains “We have told our em-
ployees that they can decide completely themselves”. This office deliberately has fewer 
work places than employees and is designed and equipped to be an arena for physical 
meetings, both for work but also very much for socializing. But this does not mean that 
the management prefers the remote working, as emphasized by the HR manager: ”[Our 
employees] work in teams so when they consider whether to sit at home or in the office, 
they have to prioritize the team's efficiency over their own efficiency. And then we [the 
management] are clear that we want the employees to be in the office and contribute 
to the environment. In other words, we are concerned with the culture, and it is more 
difficult to build a community when everyone is at home.”  

Sparebank 1 Dev is a Fintech company developing software for Norwegian Banks. 
The organization offers a wide area of services and caters to both the consumer and 
professionals. Counting both their in-house employees and consultants, Sparebank 1 
had 650 employees at the moment of our study. The teams had considerable freedom 
in how they worked. Most teams used a Kanban variant with Scrum elements and sev-
eral deliberation practices, such as backlog meetings, team meetings, and daily stand-
ups. They used objectives and key results (OKRs) to guide their work and, influenced 
by Wodtke (2017), used “Monday commitments” and “Friday wins”. Teams used ret-
rospectives to improve work practices, and structured problem solving for continuous 
improvement. Finally, Sparebank 1 Dev regularly performed company surveys to un-
derstand the work-from-home situation. The bank renovated their office space during 
the pandemic.  

5 

3.2  Data collection 

We have collected office presence data from the records of desk booking and access 
cards entries from two companies. Office presence data was extracted and analyzed in 
Excel  quantitatively  to  visualize  the  office  presence  during  the  different  weeks  and 
months (Fig. 1 and Fig. 2) and to derive the average presence in the different weekdays 
(Fig. 3). The available data was quite simple, in the summary format and was not trace-
able to individuals. Hence, our analysis was limited to descriptive statistics.  

Qualitative data regarding personal preferences for working in the office or working 
remotely have been obtained from qualitative interviews in Knowit and the employee 
surveys in Storebank 1 Dev.  

In Knowit, we performed 12 semi-structured interviews (see the detailed overview 
of the interviewees in Table 2), which were transcribed and analysed using thematic 
analysis. The interview guide was based on the results of a literature summary, and a 
pilot interview was conducted. The researchers team printed all transcribed interviews 
and identified information or statements of interest, cut out paper snippets, and grouped 
these into themes that were given a descriptive name, e.g. “special reasons to be present 
at the office”, or “improvement suggestions''. A set of hypotheses emerged on the side 
as these groups were created, hence being a form of constant comparison [15]. This 
analysis resulted in a collection of 32 themes. As Knowit had moved into brand new 
offices two months before the interviews (see an overview of the offices in Fig. 4), the 
interviewees could reflect on their experience with both offices. The new offices had 
more seats and several social zones.  

In Sparebank 1 Dev, we collected survey responses regarding the personal experi-
ences with the chosen work arrangements. The survey received 244 responses from the 
maximum of 650 employees resulting in the response rate of 36%. The responses in-
cluded the reasons for working remotely as opposed to not working in the office, which 
were extracted and comparatively analyzed together with the responses from the qual-
itative interviews conducted in Knowit.  

An overview of data collection activities and data sources is available in Table 1.  

Company 

Knowit 

Sparebank 
1 Dev 

Table 1. Overview of the data sources. 

Data collection 

Office presence 
Archival data from a desk booking sys-
tem Seatit during 2021-10-13 – 06-04-
2022. 
Access card data during 2021-10-01 – 
30-04-2022. 

Reasons for remote working 
12 semi-structured interviews about 
remote work preferences and office 
presence in June 2022.  
244 survey responses about remote 
work preferences and office presence 
October and December 2021  

 
 
6 

Table 2. Overview of the interviewees at Knowit 

No  Role 
1 

Consultant and developer 

Gender 
Female 

Age group 
35-40 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

Director of business development 

Operation manager  

Designer 

HR manager 

Unit manager, sales, and business 
development  
Director of product development 

Male 

Male 

Female 
Female 

Male 

Male 

Summer intern/part time consultant   Male 

System developer  
9 
10  System consultant  
11  Team lead 
Male 
12  Frontend developer, senior developer   Male 

Male 

Male 

50-55 

45-50 

25-30 

45-50 

60+ 

35-40 

25-30 

30-35 

25-30 

60+ 

50-55 

4 

Results 

In this section, we provide our findings with respect to office presence in the flexible 
work arrangements by starting with an overview of the office presence records (desk 
bookings  and  access  card  entries),  followed  by  the  analysis  of  the  average  presence 
during the different workdays and reasons for working from home vs working from the 
office. 

4.1  Office presence 

Our analysis of the office presence in both companies shows that the offices during 
the studied time period varied but has been relatively low (see Fig. 1 and Fig. 2). In the 
fall 2021 the office presence in Knowit was below 30% and below 50% in Sparebank 
1 Dev. One exception in Sparebank 1 Dev was the third week of October when they 
organized an after-work social event with food, drinks and activities.  

In winter 2021/2022, the new wave of the pandemic started and the employees were 
advised to work from home, which is evident in the low office presence during January 
2022.  

In spring 2022, the office presence in Knowit returned to the level of the fall 2021 
in February until mid March and started to spike to close to 100% on certain days fur-
ther on. This was motivated by the company-organized office-based social events. In 
Sparebank 1 Dev, both January and February were characterized by low office pres-
ence, which returned in the beginning of March to the level evidenced in the fall 2021 
(around 50%). 

 
 
7 

Fig. 1. Overview of office presence (desks booked per day, excludes days with no presence) in 
Knowit (Oct 2021 - Apr 2022). 

Oct 2021 

Nov 2021

Dec 2021

Jan 2022

Feb 2022

Mar 2022

Apr 2022

100%

s
e
i
r
t
n
e
d
r
a
c

s
s
e
c
c
a

f
o

r
e
b
m
u
N

75%

50%

25%

0

Fig. 2. Overview of office presence (access entries per day, including weekends and holidays) in 
SpareBank1 (Oct 2021 - Apr 2022). 

When plotting the average number of employees in the office during the different 
workdays, we found different patterns across the two companies. In Knowit, the week 
started with the lowest office presence on Monday with the most popular office days 
being Wednesday, followed by Friday, when the company organizes afterwork activi-
ties.  In  contrast,  the  office  presence  in  SpareBank1  resembled  an  even  distribution 
curve with the highest presence on Wednesdays (typical days for social events) and 
lowest presence on Fridays.  

Fig. 3. Average office presence during the week. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 

4.2 

Factors that motivate remote working 

Long or inconvenient commute to the office: Long commute time was the number 
one reason for working remotely in Sparebank1 Dev, reported by more than 50% of the 
respondents. 30% commuted to work by train and 30% by tram or bus. Further 67% of 
respondents required more than half an hour to get to work (one way). The interviews 
in Knowit confirmed that the commute to work is one of the most important factors that 
motivate remote working. Knowit has recently moved their offices to a new building in 
the  capital  of  Norway,  Oslo,  which  does  not  provide  any  parking  spaces.  However, 
despite the convenient location, this meant that the employees had to walk, bike, or use 
public transportation to reach the offices, which was seen as more difficult than jumping 
into the car in the morning. Commute time also made a difference. In fact, two inter-
viewees admitted that if they lived closer to the office, they would be more likely to 
work onsite. One experienced developer explained: “I use a bus, an express bus. It takes 
about 45-50 minutes to work and over an hour back. It affects my preferences for work-
ing from home.”  

Superior ability to focus at home: Home office environment was reported to be 
superior in providing the ability to concentrate as reported by the survey responses from 
Sparebank1 Dev, as a respondent commented: “For me, the noise [in the office] is a 
real problem. I use a lot of energy just to keep my concentration”. 

Better-equipped home-office: In addition to the already mentioned factors, invest-
ments into the home-office during the pandemic is what makes people comfortable to 
work from home and, might swing the weights when deciding whether to commute to 
the office. At least Knowit employees do not have to come to the office when occupied 
with individual tasks. Desks, chairs, and monitors that were acquired (and paid for by 
Knowit) during the pandemic all were kept by the employees. As one interviewee de-
scribed, "They [the company management] make sure that we have really good equip-
ment. The most crucial things, such as furniture, desks, monitors, and more, they are 
really, really good”. Similarly, several people from Sparebank 1 Dev have mentioned 
the problems with the equipment in the office and more superior conditions at home. 
Also Sparebank 1 Dev provided financial support for buying office equipment.  

Convenience  for  running  personal  routines  at  home:  Some  interviewees  men-
tioned various ways their daily or weekly needs are difficult to meet when being in the 
office. For example, for one interviewee it was about exercising. If there was a gym in 
the office, it would be more appealing to come into the office more often. Convenience 
for completing personal issues when working from home was also mentioned in Spare-
bank 1 Dev’s survey.  

Habit of working from home: Besides, the very habit of working from home during 
the  pandemic  times  resulted  in  many  continuing  to  work  remotely,  as  reported  by  a 
large number of respondents in the Sparebank1 Dev’s survey, as a respondent com-
mented:  “I  believe  that  people  have  become  comfortable  with  home  offices  and  the 
extra time it brings to the family etc.”.  

Schedule full of online meetings: We found that some respondents in Sparebank1 
Dev found it impractical to commute to the office when their workdays are packed with 
online meetings. As a respondent commented, “[We have] challenges with equipment 
in meeting rooms – not adapted for having [hybrid] meetings in Teams. When you are 

9 

a presenter, you need two screens. So when there are many Teams meetings it is more 
practical to sit at home.” 

Other reasons. Among the other reasons that were mentioned by few of the research 
participants were better coffee machines, food, lighting and air ventilation in the house-
hold, and the good weather conditions. As one of the interviewees described: “When 
the weather is nice, I rather stay at home”.  

4.3 

Factors that motivate office presence 

Social interaction with colleagues: Many interviewees revealed that the prime pur-
pose for coming into the office was to meet colleagues and especially to get to know 
people, i.e., grow personal contract networks. This was also echoed in the survey re-
sponses from Sparebank 1 Dev. To make the offices more attractive both companies 
invested in upgrading them during the pandemic with the goal to create more social 
zones (see Fig. 4). Further, a few interviewees said that being in the office provided the 
unique feeling of inspiration from interactions with colleagues that was absent when 
working from home. One developer working at Knowit for two years explained “I love 
being in the office. I enjoy working with people. I like meeting other people. I absolutely 
depend on that to do a good job, I depend on being happy, and then I want to meet 
other people, so I want to be in the office as much as possible.” During the pandemic 
people that strongly wanted to work from the office were allowed to do so. Especially 
those people who did not have access to any meeting places when the society was shut 
down, appreciated the possibility to meet colleagues in the office.  

Fig.  4.  The  new  offices  of  Knowit  (April  2022)  with  several  social  zones,  bookable  meeting 
rooms, individual offices, and team areas in the open work area.  

Presence  of  colleagues  in  the  office  and  their  availability:  Many  interviewees 
commented on the use of the desk booking system that allowed checking who else is 
planning to be in the office on a particular day. Colleagues' presence was reported to 

 
 
 
10 

have a profound influence on the personal choices in the way that people were more 
likely to come in when colleagues of interest reported to be onsite and when their cal-
endars showed that their schedules are not fully booked with meetings. A few inter-
viewees confessed that they were also more likely to work from home if many other 
colleagues were not reporting to come into the office. This was also the case among a 
group of survey respondents in Sparebank1 Dev. Since the main motivation to be in the 
office is to socialise with others, nobody really wants to commute to the office to work 
in isolation. As an interviewee from Knowit explains: “It’s not only about knowing that 
Erik will be at work, but also that Erik actually has time for visitors”. A product man-
ager further explains “If I see that my colleague booked a desk, I book one next to him”.  
Tasks that require interaction: Several interviewees mentioned that the nature of 
work and the nature of daily tasks might have a large influence on their decision to 
come to the office. For example, some meetings were easier to conduct and more pro-
ductive when held in person, while individual tasks felt more appropriate for focused 
work in isolation at home. As one interviewee explained: “So I'm trying to set up this 
work-from-home day for focused work, I need concentration then. The meetings are 
also best held in the office”. These meetings included planning meetings, brainstorming 
meetings, first customer meetings, workshops, and task assignment meetings.  

Enhanced work/life balance: A few interviewees mentioned that they needed to go 
into the office to  differentiate between work and home, in other words, improve the 
work/life balance. An interviewee who preferred working from the office explained: 
“It's a lot easier for me to separate work from not working when I'm in the office, espe-
cially when it comes to breaks. When I'm at home, I find it a bit difficult. When you are 
taking a break at home, do you work or do you not work? Yes, it gets a little weird as 
it blurs a little into each other”. 

Other reasons: Finally, some of the interviewees mentioned reasons that would oc-
casionally influence their choice for commuting to the office, such as the need to leave 
the house and additional errands planned that require commuting anyway, which all 
increased the likelihood of working in the office but were not permanent motivators. 
Besides, a few research participants speculated that better food in the canteens, coffee 
machines and availability of a gym in the office would make them change their mind 
and come more often to the office.  

5 

Concluding discussion 

In this paper, we have explored the actual state of the office presence in two software 
companies operating in Norway and the reasons for continuing working remotely after 
the reopening of the society after the pandemic. Both companies are known for being 
mature when it comes to agile methods and techniques, they upgraded their office space 
during Covid-19. The current work policy in the companies was that developers could 
spend two days at home and three days at the office, and this could be adjusted after 
agreeing  with  the  work  unit  or  the  team,  the  customer  and  the  manager.  Further,  at 
Knowit, employees need to have a suitable home-office to be allowed to work from 
home.  

11 

5.1  Employee presence in the office 

With respect to our first research question (RQ1: How often are employees present in 
the office?), we found that the offices have been half-empty. The office presence in 
both companies have been below 50% since the fall 2021 with the lowest attendance in 
the winter months, January and February 2022, when a wave of infections increased. 
The office attendance increased only in one of our cases, in Knowit, as a result of the 
realization of the long-term impacts of remote working and the importance of social 
interaction. Our findings provide field evidence that supports the results of surveying 
employee preferences for continuing to work remotely [2, 13].  

However, it is also fair to state that we are still witnessing the transition from the 
forced WFH during the pandemic to what we believe will be the hybrid work arrange-
ments of the future. As a respondent from Sparebank 1 Dev explains: “It's difficult to 
go from 100% home office to 100% office in such a short time, now Norway just opened 
too, and before that there was a lot of infection, so a longer transition phase is needed”. 

5.2 

Factors that influence where people work from 

With respect to our second research question (RQ2: What hinders and what motivates 
employees to visit the office?), we found a list of factors that motivate remote work and 
a list of factors that motivate office presence (see a summary in Table 3). Notably, some 
of the reasons are behavioural, some have practical motivation, some are related to the 
office equipment and design, and some are dictated by the nature of the work tasks. The 
main driver for working from home is the commute. One implication of this is that if a 
company wants a high office presence, they need to be located in a place that is easy 
and fast to reach. Further, the main driver for being at the office is meeting the col-
leagues in your team or your group, i.e., the people one works with. If one’s colleagues 
are not there, it is more likely that one will stay at home. As we found that social activ-
ities right after work motivate people to come to the office, social arrangements can be 
used as a tool to increase office presence. While all developers and team members ap-
preciate focused time alone, they appreciate being with their colleagues as well. Fur-
ther, our findings indicate that employees might be more likely to work onsite in the 
offices that satisfy the majority of their needs, including zones for collaboration and 
social interaction and silent zones for focused, undisturbed work, good quality office 
equipment, and good quality food in the canteen.  

Yet, our findings are likely to indicate that hybrid work arrangements, in which the 
office days are mixed with the WFH days, are likely to remain the trend for the future, 
since this is an easy way to satisfy the diverse needs of the employees. This is also 
consonant with prior studies that demonstrated that working from home has both its 
advantages and disadvantages [1, 3, 5, 7, 10, 12]. A fair implication of this is that com-
panies might consider reducing or repurposing their office space, especially on the days 

 
 
12 

the offices are mostly empty, since the office presence never reaches 100%. The solu-
tions to this problem include hot desking, having onsite work divided into shifts, mov-
ing to smaller offices or maybe renting out company offices to startups or partners on 
the days with the lowest attendance. 

Table 3. Factors motivating remote work and office presence. 

Factors motivating remote work 

Factors motivating office presence 

v
e
D
1
k
n
a
b
e
r
a
p
S

t
i

w
o
n
K

v
e
D
1
k
n
a
b
e
r
a
p
S

t
i

w
o
n
K

Long or inconvenient commute 
to the office 
Superior ability to focus at home 
(noise and interruptions in the 
office) 
Better-equipped home office 

Convenience for running per-
sonal routines while at home 
Habit of working from home 

Schedule full of online meetings 

X  X  Social interaction with colleagues 

X  X 

Presence of colleagues in the of-
fice and their availability 

X  X 

X  X  Tasks that require interaction 

X  X  Enhanced work/life balance 

  X  Need to leave the house  

  X  Additional errands planned that re-
quire commuting anyway 

X 

X 

X 

X 

Better conditions at home: cof-
fee, food, lighting or ventilation 
Good weather conditions 

  X 

X 

5.3 

Future work 

Our exploratory findings show a need for a deeper understanding of what are the good 
team and company strategies when introducing flexible work arrangements. It is evi-
dent that when software developers, product owners, or managers know that their col-
leagues  will  be  working  onsite,  it  is  more  likely  that  they  will  show  up  themselves. 
Therefore, more research is needed to study desk booking systems and other systems 
providing visibility into the office presence. Further, the current task a team member is 
working on affects the preferences for where to work from. Our related study [16] con-
firms that developers chose to perform tasks with vague requirements in co-location 
while individual tasks that require focus are best performed at home. Future research 
shall explore how to plan and organize a hybrid work week optimized for individuals, 
the team, and the company. As long commute time is the main driver for working from 
home, more research is needed to understand how team members' geographical distance 
to the office affects hiring and team composition strategies. Should companies that ex-
pect high office presence employ people only living near the office? Should companies 

 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 

compose teams based on the member location and with similar office presence prefer-
ences in mind? Finally, future research shall also explore how to onboard new team 
members, given that traditionally new hires are onboarded through close onsite men-
toring requiring high office presence both from the new people and their senior team 
members.  

Acknowledgements 

We thank Knowit AS and Sparebank 1 Dev for their engagement in our research, and 
the Norwegian Research Council for funding the research through the projects Trans-
formit (grant number 321477) and 10xTeams (grant number 309344). 

References 

1.  Smite, D., Tkalich, A., Moe, N. B., Papatheocharous, E., Klotins, E., Buvik, M. P.:  

Changes in perceived productivity of software engineers during COVID-19 pandemic: The 
voice of evidence. Journal of Systems and Software 186 (2022): 111197. 

2.  Barrero, J.M., Bloom, N. and Davis, S.J.: Let Me Work From Home, or I Will Find An-
other Job. University of Chicago, Becker Friedman Institute for Economics Working Pa-
per, 2021-87, (2021). 

3.  Gratton L.: How to do hybrid right. Harvard Business Review. 99(3):66-74, (2021). 
4.  Smite, D., Moe, N. B., Klotins, E., Gonzalez-Huerta, J.: From forced working-from-home 

to working-from-anywhere: Two revolutions in telework. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:2101.08315 (2021). 

5.  Ford, D., Storey, M.A., Zimmermann, T., Bird, C., Jaffe, S., Maddila, C., Butler, J.L., 

Houck, B., Nagappan, N.: A tale of two cities: Software developers working from home 
during the covid-19 pandemic. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Method-
ology (TOSEM), 31(2):1-37 (2022) 

6.  Santos, R.E., Ralph, P.: Practices to Improve Teamwork in Software Development During 

the COVID-19 Pandemic: An Ethnographic Study. CHASE arXiv preprint 
arXiv:2203.09626 (2022) 

7.  Yang, L., Holtz, D., Jaffe, S., Suri, S., Sinha, S., Weston, J., Joyce, C., Shah, N., Sherman, 
K., Hecht, B., Teevan, J.: The effects of remote work on collaboration among information 
workers. Nature human behaviour, pp.1-12 (2021). 

8.  Blanchard, A.L.: The effects of COVID-19 on virtual working within online groups, 

Group Processes & Intergroup Relations. 24(2):290-6 (2021).  

9.  Fayard, A.L., Weeks, J., Mahwesh, K.: Designing the hybrid office. From workplace to 

“culture space.”. Harvard Business Review. (2021).  

10.  Russo, D., Hanel, P. H., Altnickel, S., Van Berkel, N.: The daily life of software engineers 
during the covid-19 pandemic. In 2021 IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on Soft-
ware Engineering: Software Engineering in Practice (ICSE-SEIP), pp.364-373, (2021). 
11.  I. Ozkaya, "The Future of Software Engineering Work," in IEEE Software, vol. 38, no. 5, 

pp. 3-6, Sept.-Oct. 2021, doi: 10.1109/MS.2021.3089729 

12.  Oliveira, Jr. E., Leal, G., Valente, M.T., Morandini, M., Prikladnicki, R., Pompermaier, L., 
Chanin, R., Caldeira, C., Machado, L., de Souza, C., : Surveying the impacts of COVID-
19 on the perceived productivity of Brazilian software developers. In Proceedings of the 
34th Brazilian Symposium on Software Engineering, pp. 586-595 (2020). 

14 

13.  Smite, D., Moe, N.B., Hildrum, J., Huerta, J.G. and Mendez, D., 2022. Work-From-Home 
is Here to Stay: Call for Flexibility in Post-Pandemic Work Policies. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:2203.11136. 

14.  Yin, R.K.: Case study research: design and methods. Sage, Thousand Oaks, Calif. (2009) 
15.  Seaman, C.B.,: Qualitative methods in empirical studies of software engineering. IEEE 

Transactions on software engineering, 25(4), pp.557-572 (1999). 

16.  Sporsem, T., Moe, N.B.: Coordination Strategies When Working from Anywhere: A Case 
Study of Two Agile Teams. In: Stray, V., Stol, KJ., Paasivaara, M., Kruchten, P. (eds) Ag-
ile Processes in Software Engineering and Extreme Programming. XP 2022. Lecture Notes 
in Business Information Processing, vol 445. Springer, Cham. (2022) 

 
 
 
