.

Prepared for submission to JCAP

Conformal Cyclic Cosmology
Signatures and Anomalies of the
CMB Sky

Eve Bodnia,a Vlad Isenbaev,b Kellan Colburn,a Joe Swearngin,a
Dirk Bouwmeestera,c

aDepartment of Physics, University of California, Santa Barbara, California 93106, USA
bNuro, Inc., 1300 Terra Bella Ave., Mountain View, USA
cHuygens-Kamerlingh Onnes Laboratorium, Leiden University, 2333 CA, Leiden, Nether-
lands

E-mail: ebodnia@ucsb.edu

Abstract. Circles of low-variance and Hawking points in the Cosmic Microwave Background
(CMB), resulting from black hole mergers and black hole evaporation, respectively, in a
previous cycle of the universe, have been predicted as possible evidence for the Conformal
Cyclic Cosmology model (CCC) introduced by R. Penrose. We present a high-resolution
search for such low-variance circles in the Planck and WMAP CMB data, and introduce
HawkingNet, our machine learning open-source software based on a ResNet18 algorithm,
to search for Hawking points in the CMB. We ﬁnd that CMB anomalies, consisting of a
single or a few bright pixels, erroneously lead to regions with many low-variance circles when
applying the search criteria used in previous works [1]. After removing the anomalies from
the data no statistically signiﬁcant low-variance circles can be found. Concerning Hawking
points, also no statistically signiﬁcant evidence is found when using a Gaussian temperature
amplitude model over ∼ 1◦ opening angle and after accounting for CMB anomalies. That
CMB anomalies themselves might be remnants of Hawking points is not supported by low-
variance and/or high-temperature circles around them. The absence of such distinct features
in the CMB does not disprove CCC because if the density of such circles and Hawking points
is large an interference speckle pattern in the CMB might arise instead. This would lead to
non-Gaussian ﬂuctuation in the CMB, a feature not unique to CCC. We do observe signiﬁcant
local deviation of the real CMB sky from Gaussian noise on a local scale when using best-ﬁt
ΛCDM and COM PowerSpect CBM TT-full power spectra.

Keywords: Cosmic Microwave Background anomalies, circles of low variance, Hawking
points, machine learning, non-Gaussian CMB

2
2
0
2

g
u
A
1
1

]

O
C
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
1
2
0
6
0
.
8
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents

1 Introduction

2 The GP method with high resolution

3 A Machine Learning Search of Hawking Points

4 Discussion and Conclusion

A The HawkingNet

B Figure 17: Planck COMMANDER Anomalies

1

Introduction

1

3

7

15

15

20

The Conformal Cyclic Cosmology model (CCC) introduced by R. Penrose [2, 3], and inspired
by work of P. Tod [4, 5], led to the qualitative prediction of concentric low-variance circular
rings in the cosmic microwave background (CMB) resulting from super-massive black-hole
mergers in the previous aeon - former version of our current Universe [1]. Furthermore,
Hawking evaporation of black holes, the expected ﬁnal fate of isolated super-massive black
holes in the previous aeon, are predicted to give rise to bright spots in the CMB, referred
to as Hawking points. Qualitative arguments predict that Hawing points are surrounded
by concentric low-variance circular rings that are somewhat higher in temperature than the
average CMB temperature, and that concentric low-variance rings without a central Hawking
point should be somewhat lower in temperature [1].

V. Gurzadyan and R. Penrose (GP) reported that they found numerous concentric fam-
ilies of the low-variance rings in the Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP)- the
release of 7 years CMB data [1, 23]. They concluded that these circles are statistically rel-
evant structures in the CMB data, rather than resulting from Gaussian random noise, thus
providing evidence of conformal cyclic cosmology [6]. They compared the numbers of the ring
families with the corresponding numbers of the elliptically distorted rings in the CMB, which
is referred in their text as the "sky-twist" procedure. In the CMB data, GP examined 10,885
circular patches in the sky of equal number of pixels, systematically covering the sky but ex-
cluding the region of our galactic disk. The temperature variance, i.e. the standard deviation
σ in the temperature, was calculated over circular rings of annular width 0.5 degree and of
angular radii in the range 2.5-16 degrees in steps of 0.5 degree. If among those rings around
a given centre, the temperature variance was at least 15 µK below the average variance for
that speciﬁc centre, the ring was considered "low variance". Many instances of 3 and also
of 4 concentric circles where identiﬁed in Ref. [1], seemingly providing support to the CCC
hypothesis.

At this point we emphasize the decisive role of the average of the variance of the rings
with annular width 0.5 degree and of angular radii in the range 2.5-16 degrees in steps of
0.5 degree, which we will refer to as the baseline variance, in determining which circles are
considered to be of low variance. We note that if for some reason this baseline variance is
unexpectedly high, which can happen when there is an unusually high or low temperature

– 1 –

pixel in the data in the region from 2.5 to 16 degrees, there will be low-variance circles
identiﬁed that would not be there without this one bright or dark pixel. Those erroneously
identiﬁed circles will come in clusters, leading to the possibility of multiple concentric low-
variance circles. Such unusually bright or dark pixels, or perhaps a few such pixels together,
are known to reside within the CMB and are referred to as CMB anomalies. Such anomalies
might be the result of the extensive data processing, or of inaccuracies in the measuring
system, or perhaps represent real, but yet unknown, astronomical phenomena.

The occurrence of low-varience circles in the same WMAP data was reexamined in
Refs.
[7] and [8]. The authors did conﬁrmed the concentric circles in the CMB data, and
found that the WMAP signal is indeed dominated by a cosmological signal rather than by
instrumental noise. However, they claimed that such variations are the result of usual CMB
anisotropies and therefore statistically expected. We would like to note that the technical
approach towards the problem by these groups is drastically diﬀerent from the one taken
by GP. GP’s way of simulating data is constructing the map of the Gaussian sky injected
with the WMAP’s noise, in contrast to the groups of [7, 8] who simulate the data using the
CMB power spectrum plus the WMAP noise for Lambda cold dark matter model (ΛCDM ).
Penrose and Gurzadyan argued that the treatment in Ref. [7] of the CMB signal as random
Gaussian noise seems to be invalid, due to Kolmogorov’s theorem and von Neumann’s method
[9].

The search for low variance circles was also repeated in Ref.[10] on the same WMAP
data set and on the newer Planck data. The authors also conﬁrmed the existence of the
special directions claimed by [1]; however, they consider those consistent with the predic-
tions of the standard cosmological model. For their analysis, the authors used the same
parameter set from [1] on the WMAP W-band smoothed with a 20 arcminute full-width
at half-maximum (FWHM) Gaussian beam data set and the newer Planck COMMANDER
data. The COMMANDER data were downgraded from 2048 pixels to 512 and also smoothed
with a 20 arcminute FWHM Gaussian beam to save computation time. The simulations were
created by the Planck best-ﬁt ΛCDM angular power spectra generated for 2048 pixels and
also downgraded to 512 pixels and smoothed out with the same Gaussian beam [18]. The
authors discovered that the distribution of low variance rings on the hemispheres is prevalent
in the COMMANDER data, but concluded the asymmetry to be statistically insigniﬁcant,
given that nearly 25% of their simulations produce a distribution of low variance directions
with a higher dipole asymmetry than seen in the data. The origin of the CMB dipole asym-
metry evidence based on WMAP and Planck data has been questioned [11], and possible
explanations are ranging from inhomogeneous noise distributions at the considered scales to
the exotic dark matter theories and cosmic strings [11–14].

The predicted Hawking points, representing the Hawking radiation resulting from mas-
sive black hole evaporation in the previous aeon, have been studied by [15–17]. In a preceding
aeon, all of the mass in that former Universe eventually falls into supermassive black holes,
which then evaporate via Hawking radiation. At its late life stage, the eon undergoes enor-
mous conformal compressing, forcing the remnant Hawking radiation to become Hawking
points at the crossover surface. The Hawking points are predicted to show up in the CMB
sky in the form of a spatially Gaussian signal spread over a small data patch with an amplitude
of the order of 100 mK [15].

In summary, there is signiﬁcant controversy about the claims in support of the CCC
model, and a lot of relevant CMB data has been smoothed out in order to facilitate the
computational intensive tasks of searching for signatures of CCC in the CMB. We noted

– 2 –

above a potential pitfall, which seems to have been overlooked so far, for statistical analyses
set by CMB anomalies in the form of a few unusual bright or dark pixels.

In this article we take advantage of a supercomputer and machine learning approaches
to ﬁrstly try to reproduce the analysis by [1] on WMAP data and the analysis of [10], but
with 500,000 centers in the sky, instead of 10,885 centers. We ﬁnd that CMB anomalies
play a decisive role, and we repeat the search for low-variance circles after removing the small
collection of CMB anomalies. Secondly, we search for the Hawking points on higher resolution
Planck data sets using diﬀerent power spectra and a novel ResNet-based machine learning
(ML) tool on over 50 million centers in the sky [19, 24].

2 The GP method with high resolution

We repeated the search method of Gurzadyan and Penrose [1], and for this it is essential
to establish an appropriate "baseline" temperature variance for a certain region in the sky
around which the variance of ring-like structures is to be determined. We performed the
baseline calculations and searched for the low variance circles across both hemispheres using
500,000 centers in WMAP and Planck COMMANDER data.

Figure 1 presents the baseline variance underlying the GP analysis, of the WMAP data
[1]. Figure 2, shows the baseline variance in Planck COMMANDER data. Both ﬁgures show
pronounced higher baseline variance regions with sharp circular boundaries. Note that the
scale bars indicate changes in the baseline variance by up to ∼ 30µK. The origin of those

Figure 1: The baseline calculation for the Gurzadyan and Penrose search method on the
WMAP data [1]

regions turns out to be the presence of CMB anomalies, tiny regions of 1-2 pixels diameter with
a signiﬁcantly higher temperatures, combined with the method of determining the baseline.

– 3 –

Mollweide view0.09086640.122841mKFigure 2: The baseline in Planck COMMANDER data

Figure 3 shows the anomaly that gives rise to the most pronounced ring feature of relatively
high baseline variance. The consequence of this is that one will ﬁnd many low-variance (15µK
or lower, compared to the baseline) circles that are not real low-variance circles. Those rings
will all be clustered around the anomalies, and therefore can also lead to the appearance of
families of nearly concentric circle. The smoothing of date in previous works has masked this
important feature.

The orange curve in Fig. 4 shows our data on ﬁnding low-variance circles of diﬀerent radii
with the anomalies still in the CMB data. The blue curve shows our results from simulations
based on random (Gaussian) ﬂuctuations with the appropriate power spectrum of the CMB.
One is inclined to conclude that there is a statistically signiﬁcant excess of low variance rings
which will be found in clusters in the sky, consistent with [1]. However upon excluding the
CMB anomalies, identiﬁed by pixels with high temperature ≥ 2.7294K, leading to the green
curve in Fig. 4, the statistical signiﬁcance of low-variance rings vanishes. In other words, the
number of low-variance circles in the real data is approximately consistent with the number
of circles to be found in random (Gaussian) noise. There is also no longer any statistically
signiﬁcant evidence for a preference for concentric low-variance circles.

– 4 –

Mollweide view0.0956490.121387mKFigure 3: One of the anomalously bright spot in the WMAP data that signiﬁcantly raises the
baseline temperature in the surrounding region. Comparing to the mean CMB temperature
of approximately 2.725K, the temperature of the anomalous spot is 2.7294K, about 400 to
500 µK above the CMB mean!

– 5 –

Figure 4: Search for low variance circles in Planck COMMANDER data using the GP
method. The orange trend correspond to the data including the anomalies as done by [1].
The green line is the same analysis as in [1] but with removed anomalies. Finally, the blue
line are 500 simulations with the error bars based on histograms. The statistically signiﬁcant
excess disappears as soon as the data set is corrected for CMB anomalies.

– 6 –

051015202530Radius of the CCC circles [degree]105104103102101100Fraction of the low variance circles for all the centers [unitless]SimulationsData with anomaliesData corrected for anomalies3 A Machine Learning Search of Hawking Points

We now turn to the investigation of possible Hawking points in the CMB, as predicted by CCC.
This is a type of problem, searching for a well-deﬁned feature in a large and noisy data set,
that is ideally suited for a machine learning approach. We build upon experience in machine
learning approaches to reinforcement learning [21]. Using a GPU 40 TFlops supercomputer
and our adopted machine learning software HawkingNet (see Appendix A), we ﬁrst trained a
neural network in distinguishing between the presence and absence of artiﬁcially introduced
Hawking points at the center of small patches in the sky, and subsequently performed this
task on 50 million such centers in the real CMB sky.

We implement two kinds of training simulations for the CMB sky: one based on a
Gaussian noise model and another on a Pseudo-synthetic model that uses real CMB data
before adding artiﬁcial Hawking points. The common feature of the two models is that every
considered center is enclosed in a 4 × 4 degrees patch in the sky - a matrix of the CMB
temperature of 128 × 128 elements, which approximately corresponds to the Planck data
resolutions. For every patch, we subtract the mean temperature in order to avoid temperature
bias between all the patches used in our analysis. Here we do have to stay alert to the pitfall
of CMB anomalies in a certain patch! Then the Hawking point simulation signature suggested
in Ref. [15] is added and the neural network is trained to optimally identify such points. The
signature is an added spatially Gaussian-shaped signal with an amplitudes varying from 100
to 400µK and a width ranging from 0.7 to 1.2 degree. After the training, the neural network
searched for Hawking points in the real data as well as in CMB simulation data without added
Hawking points for comparison.

The Gaussian simulation method: In our Gaussian simulation method, 50 mil-
lion centers with surrounding patches are assumed to follow a Gaussian global spatial noise
distribution and were generated by the HEALPix library which ensures the spatial unifor-
mity for all the points across the sphere [20]. HEALPix allows to input the CMB power
spectra and generates the (Gaussian) random temperature ﬂuctuations data according to
these spectra. We used the best-ﬁt ΛCDM CMB power spectra from the baseline Planck
TT,TE,EE+lowE+lensing and "COM PowerSpect CMB-TT-full R30" - empirically con-
structed spectra from the real data without any assumption about the CMB model [22].
Note that we use Gaussian proﬁles for both the spatial shape of the Hawking points and for
the noise model. After the training of the neural network both the real CMB and simulated
CMB data (without added artiﬁcial Hawking points) are subject to a Hawking point search
and the results are shown in Fig. 5

Figure 5 (a) shows two probability density distributions, the real data from SMICA
Planck (blue) and the simulations (orange) using the Gaussian method with the best-ﬁt
ΛCDM CMB power spectrum. Figure 5 (b) shows the density distributions for the real data
from SMICA Planck (blue) and the simulations (orange) with the "COM PowerSpect CMB-
TT-full R30" power spectrum. The classiﬁcation score is a number assigned as the result of
the MLE regression by the ML network indicating presence of the Hawking points signatures
in a scanned patch (see Appendix A); negative/positive values correspond to the likelihood
of the absence/presence of Hawking-point-like features.

What should be expected if this method ﬁnds statistically signiﬁcant Hawking points
in a reliable way in the real data? First, one should expect a contribution from statistically
insigniﬁcant Hawking points ("fake" Hawking points resulting from noise) to overlap with
the simulation data (without added Hawking points), and second one should expect the real

– 7 –

(a)

(b)

Figure 5: The Hawking points hypothesis tested on the real data from SMICA Planck
and the Gaussian simulations using ResNet18 ML architecture for 200 µK added Gaussian
amplitude. (a) Blue represents the real data, and orange the Gaussian simulations without
(b)
Hawking points generated using HEALPix and the best-ﬁt ΛCDM power spectrum.
Blue represents the real data, and orange the Gaussian simulations without Hawking points
generated using HEALPix and "COM PowerSpect CMB-TT-full R301" power spectrum. The
classiﬁcation score is a measure of how likely it is that Hawking points are present in patches.

data to contain signiﬁcant contributions at classiﬁcation scores extending on the positive side
of the simulation data. The higher the classiﬁcation score the higher the conﬁdence of the
network in identifying Hawking points in speciﬁc patches in the sky.

From Fig. 5 (a) we see that the SMICA Planck CMB data is locally quite diﬀerent from
Gaussian noise with the best-ﬁt ΛCDM CMB power spectrum. The blue histogram represents
the real data and it falls almost completely in the range of negative classiﬁcation scores, im-
plying that hardly any Hawking-point-like features have been identiﬁed, not even statistically
insigniﬁcant Hawking points (resulting from noise as represented by the orange histogram).
This observation suggest that the SMICA Planck CMB data is locally smoother than what
follows from the ΛCDM model. The absence of proper overlap between the simulations and
the bulk of the real data implies that the network was trained on simulation data that was not
faithful to the real CMB noise spectrum in the 4 × 4 degree patches. In such cases one should
be suspicious about the validity of the ﬁndings of the machine learning search algorithm and
better training data is required.

In Fig. 5 (b), we see a better, but still far from ideal, overlap of the real data and simu-
lation data, based on training of the neural network with the model-free "COM PowerSpect
CMB-TT-full R30" power spectrum. Having gained some conﬁdence in this neural network
in identifying real Hawking points, which should have classiﬁcation scores with positive values
above the values in the simulations, we zoom in on the region of high classiﬁcation scores, as
shown in Fig. 6. We do indeed observe contributions with high classiﬁcation scores in the real
SMICA Planck data. We also used the same neural network to analyse the Planck COMMAN-
DER data as show in Fig.7. Figure 7 (a) shows a reasonable overlap between the simulations
and real data and Fig.7 (b) shows signiﬁcant contributions, much more pronounced than in
the Planck SMICA data, in the real data at high classiﬁcation scores.

– 8 –

32101234Classification score0.00.20.40.60.8Probability densityReal dataSimulations2.50.02.55.07.510.012.5Classification score0.00.10.20.30.40.50.6Probability densityReal dataSimulationsFigure 6: The zoomed-in outliers from Fig. 5 (b) which were classiﬁed as Hawking points on
SMICA Planck data with the ML network trained on Gaussian (COM PowerSpect CMB-TT-
full R30) simulation data for identifying Hawking points with a 200 µK amplitude Gaussian
signal.

(a) The classiﬁcation histogram and outlier
tail.

(b) The zoomed in tail of the distribution from
(a).

Figure 7: The Hawking points hypothesis tested on Planck COMMANDER data using the
Gaussian simulation method in the HawkingNet for 200 µK amplitude.

Having learned to be extremely cautious in drawing scientiﬁc conclusions from searchers
for features in the CMB we subsequently investigated the speciﬁc patches in the sky that
correspond to the high classiﬁcation scores. In the case of the SMICA Planck data it turned
out that there is a single high temperature anomaly in the sky, shown in Fig. 8, that misled
the neural network in identifying Hawking points in patches of the sky containing this point.
Analyzing the patches in the sky in the Planck COMMANDER data that correspond to the
outliers in Fig. 7b we ﬁnd 11 anomalies one of which is shown in Fig. 9 and the remaining 10
listed in Appendix B, Figs. 17j (a)–(j) with temperature scales with respect to the overall

– 9 –

5101520253035Classification score0.0000.0020.0040.0060.0080.010Probability densityReal dataSimulations7.55.02.50.02.55.07.510.0Classification score0.000.050.100.150.200.250.300.35Probability densityReal dataSimulations50100150200250300Classification score0.00000.00010.00020.00030.00040.00050.0006Probability densityReal dataSimulationsCMB mean temperature of 2.725 K.

Figure 8: The anomaly in the SMICA Planck data set that is the reason for the outliers
with high classiﬁcation scores in Fig. ??.

We observe that all these anomalies are single to few-pixel low temperatures, with the
coldest anomaly being at 2.6763 K (Fig. 9) and the warmest anomaly (among these cold
anomalies) at 2.7203 K. The true nature of these cold points in the sky is a mystery; however,
given that we haven’t observed such cold points in the SMICA data set, they could be artifacts
of the original data processing for the COMMANDER data, or they are real and have been
removed from the SMICA data by data processing.

The high temperature anomaly in the Planck SMICA data was apparently picked up
by the neural network to have a large likelihood of representing a Hawking point (with the
anomaly near the center of the patches).
In the case of the Planck COMMANDER data
the low temperature anomalies must have reduced the average background temperature of a
patch and thereby favoring those patches (with an anomaly near the boundary of the patches)
to detect a raised temperature at the center, suggesting the presence of a Hawking point.

We conclude that, just as in the case of the search for rings of low variance, anomalies
deceive the search algorithms in identifying Hawking points, and no statistically signiﬁcant
Hawking points have been identiﬁed.

Can we improve our machine learning approach for ﬁnding Hawking points? As pointed
out above the neural network training starting from Gaussian noise with the best-ﬁt ΛCDM
CMB power spectrum was not very successful, and the training starting from the "COM
PowerSpect CMB-TT-full R30" power spectrum was better, but not optimal. Given the fact
that the later approach did identify patches with potential Hawking points, which turned
out to be indeed regions that likely will be identiﬁed as potential Hawking points by any
other searching algorithms, unless the single or few pixel anomalies are ﬁltered out from
the data, indicates that the ML algorithm served it’s purpose fairly well. Therefor we can
at this point already make the claim that with the current CMB data resolution, Hawking

– 10 –

Figure 9: One of the 11 anomalies found by the HawkingNet in the Planck COMMANDER
data.

points with a magnitude in the range from 100 to 400 µK amplitude and spatial Gaussian
extend between 0.7 and 1.2 degrees, and small distortions thereof, can be ruled out. We did
however explore one more neural network training method, the pseudo-synthetic approach,
which could support the above claim with higher conﬁdence.

The pseudo-synthetic approach: In this method the classiﬁer was trained on real
CMB SMICA Planck data with and without added Hawking points, hence the name pseudo-
synthetic. The choice of the Planck SMICA set over COMMANDER was motivated by the
smaller amount of CMB anomalies in the data. We considered 500,000 patches of 4 × 4 degree
size from both the real data Northern and Southern hemispheres.

A concern that one could raise for this approach is that the patches of the real data
might already contain real Hawking points and if we train the network on such patches with
and without additional artiﬁcial Hawking points this might lead to a corrupt classiﬁcation
score. This scenario has been studied in the machine learning literature with the conclusion
that, as long as the set of training data (before adding or not adding the feature of interest
to individual element of the training data) do not already contain the feature of interest
in more than 50% of the cases of the individual elements of the training data, the training
will still converge to a reliable classiﬁer. For our case this means that we work under the
assumption that in the 500,000 patches of the Northern (or Southern) Hemisphere use in the
training procedure less than half of them contains a real Hawking point. This is indeed a
very reasonable assumption.

After training of the classiﬁer on the Northern (Southern) Hemisphere, we applied the
classiﬁer to the Southern (Northern) hemisphere date and to the same Gaussian simulation
data without Hawking points as used in Fig. 5 (b). The resulting classiﬁcation scores on the
real data is shown in blue in Fig. 10 and the classiﬁer score on the simulation data is shown
in orange.

– 11 –

(a)

(b)

Figure 10: The Hawking points statistical test on the Pseudo-synthetic data trained on the
(a) northern CMB hemisphere compared to the real data from the southern hemisphere (blue
distribution), (b) southern CMB hemisphere compared to the real data from the northern
hemisphere (blue distribution), and compared to the simulations based on "COM PowerSpect
CMB-TT-full R301" power spectrum (orange distribution).

Next we repeated the statistical test on pseudo-synthetic data set similarly to Fig. 10,
but excluded the very few anomalies in the Planck SMICA data and plotted the zoomed in
classiﬁcation score in the positive tail of the distribution, shown in Fig. 11. The real data
and the simulation data now completely overlap, conﬁrming and strengthening our conclusion
that Hawking points with a magnitude in the range from 100 to 400 µK amplitude and spatial
Gaussian extend between 0.7 and 1.2 degrees, and small distortions thereof, cannot be found
in the currently available CMB data.

Searching for Concentric Circles Around Anomalies: The CCC predictions of
low variance circles are very qualitative because details would depend on the very complex
dynamics of interfering and dissipating gravitational shock waves in the plasma at the mo-
ment of decoupling of light (now the CMB) from matter, 378,000 years after the beginning
of our universe. Also the Hawking point predictions are very qualitative. This led us to
a ﬁnal attempt to ﬁnd a signature for the CCC hypothesis, namely by consider the identi-
ﬁed anomalies as possible Hawking points and search for concentric circles of slightly higher
temperatures, or circles of low-variance, around them.

We repeated the low variation circles analysis around the identiﬁed anomalies with small
steps of 0.2 degrees, assuming that the circles might be thinner than suggested by Penrose.
We did not ﬁnd any circles around these anomalies with the currently available CMB data
resolution.

– 12 –

3210123Classification score0.00.10.20.30.40.50.6Probability densityReal dataSimulationsFigure 11: The Zoomed-in tail of the Hawking points statistical test on SMICA for the
Pseudo-synthetic data trained on the southern CMB hemisphere compared to the real
data from the northern hemisphere with anomalies removed.

Figure 12: The location of the found outlier in Fig. 11

– 13 –

2.53.03.54.04.55.0Classification score0.0000.0050.0100.0150.0200.025Probability densityReal dataSimulationsFigure 13: The zoomed-in red-boarded patch of Fig. 12

– 14 –

0204060801001200204060801001204 Discussion and Conclusion

We presented a high-resolution search for low-variance circles in the Planck and WMAP Cos-
mic Microwave Background (CMB) data, and introduced HawkingNet, our machine learning
open-source software based on a ResNet18 algorithm, to search for Hawking points in the
CMB. We found that CMB anomalies, consisting of a single or a few bright or dim pixels,
erroneously lead to regions with many low-variance circles as well as Hawking points when
applying the search criteria used in previous works. Given the fact that our analysis is based
on the use of a state-of-the-art supercomputer and machine learning approach, and unlike
previous studies, uses the maximum available resolution of CMB data, we conclude that no
statistically relevant sets of concentric low-variance circles and Hawking points can be found
in the currently available CMB data. Perhaps highly deformed circles and distorted Hawking
points can still be extracted but only if there are clear predictions for this.

There might also be the possibility that the density of gravitational shock waves from
merging black holes in the previous eon has been so high that we should expect to observe the
result of many interfering spherical waves, leading to a complex interference pattern. Such
a complex interference pattern at the moment of decoupling would require a very diﬀerent
characterization method than a search for clearly distinguishable ring patterns and Hawking
points in the CMB.

Our work shows that all previous attempts on identifying signatures of conformal cyclic
cosmology are inconclusive, and suﬀer from the dramatic impact of CMB anomalies on the
data analyses. Unlike our study, the previous studies were signiﬁcant constrained by limited
computational power, and as such had largely overlooked the decisive role of anomalies at
the level of single pixels in the CMB date. The Hawking point analysis has shown the
signiﬁcant deviation of the CMB real data from being locally Gaussian and from following
the best-ﬁt ΛCDM model. This analyses can be expended upon in order to test various
cosmological models. We provide the open-source code for our machine learning method and
hope that this will inspire more research on the CMB anomalies and on testing cosmological
models: https://github.com/winger/hawking_net. Higher resolution CMB data and/or
new predictions from CCC seem to be needed to continue the search for signatures of the
CCC model.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank an Jan Willem Dalhuisen for fruitful discussions and express our
admiration and appreciation to Sir Roger Penrose for proposing the intriguing CCC model,
and to scientists around the world who have contribute to the discussion on CCC.

A The HawkingNet

Our HawkingNet software https://github.com/winger/hawking_net is designed to search
for Hawking points in the noisy large CMB data sets. Its architecture is fully based on the
deep residual network (ResNet18) - a subclass of the convolution neural networks (CNN)
family. ResNet is very popular in various scientiﬁc ﬁelds that demand visual grid-based
image analysis. The HawkingNet consists of 18 neural layers - topological arrangements of
convolutional (locally connected) neurons. The connectivity pattern is very much inspired by
biological systems resembling the structure of the animal visual cortex, where the individual

– 15 –

cortical neurons are stimulated only in a restricted region of the visual (receptive) ﬁeld. The
algorithm inputs the CMB data, processes the data through its internal network trained for
data classiﬁcation, and outputs the result in a form of a classiﬁcation score, depending on
how conﬁdent it is the image patch contains a Hawking point. The most important building
blocks of the neural net are convolution layers and pooling layers (Figure 14).

First, the input CMB data goes through the convolution layers whose organization mim-
ics the response of a neuron in the visual cortex to a speciﬁc stimulus in biological systems.
Speciﬁcally, it performs the Frobenius inner product - a binary operation that takes the con-
volution kernel in a matrix form and the speciﬁc layer’s input (also a matrix) and returns
an output matrix. By convolving the input image in such a way, the number of initial free
parameters is drastically reduced bypassing the input image deeper in the neural network a
form of a abstract feature map. Next, the feature map is processed by the pooling layers
which even more reduce the dimensions of data. These layers combine the outputs of neuron
clusters in the feature map at one layer into a single neuron and pass it to the next layer.
The uniqueness of the ResNet basis is the ability of the network to skip connections to jump
over some layers, similarly to pyramidal cells in the cerebral cortex, where cortical layer VI
neurons skipping intermediate layers on their way. Skipping the connection is beneﬁcial both
for the brain and for artiﬁcial neural net because it speeds up the learning process overall and
mitigates larger training error for larger number of participating layers (known as Degradation
problem). The ﬁnal outcome from the HawkingNet performance is the classiﬁcation metric
which analyses the feature map generated by the network. Classiﬁcation in ML is generally
a statistical model that uses a logistic function to model a binary dependent variable (the
larger subgroup is referred to as logistic regression methods). So, in our case, the binary
logistic function inputs the feature map from the residual network and deﬁnes the probability
- a numerical value between 0 and 1 for every image patch whether the Hawking point is
found or not in a form of positive and negative samples respectively (Figure 15). The net-
work calculates the probability density distribution to account for the probability of ﬁnding
the Hawking point in a considered data patch as a function of assigned classiﬁed scores. We
see in Figure 15 that most of the positive samples are more likely contain the Hawking point
for classiﬁcation score 2, while for the negative samples it is more likely for the classiﬁcation
score -2. These values are a function of the overall neural network sensitivity with a binary
classiﬁer which is typically measured by comparing its logistic function with the theoretical
model.

Figure 16 illustrates the measure of our sensitivity towards classifying Hawking points.
On the y-axis, we show the theoretical fraction of positive samples with a given score, and the
same fraction observed in practice at Figure 15. Additionally, the aligned trends of empirical
and theoretical curves indicate that our network sensitivity is maximized, which was done by
11 hours of neural network training.

– 16 –

Figure 14: The ResNet18 architecture used in HawkingNet. "Conv" and "Pool" labels refer
to convolution and pooling layers. The numbers 3x3, 7x7, 64-512 represent the convolution
kernel size, and the number of available ﬁlters. Fc 1 stands for "fully connected layer with
one ﬁlter". The bold lines illustrate skipping connections discussed in the text, and dashed
lines - skipping connection with the maximized pooling power.

– 17 –

Figure 15: The HawkingNet empirical probability distributions for the positive and negative
samples. The positive samples indicate the data with classiﬁed Hawking points in contrast
to the negative samples.

– 18 –

420246810Classification score0.000.050.100.150.200.250.300.35Probability densityPositive samplesNegative samplesFigure 16: The theoretical fraction of positive samples found by the HawkingNet- data with
detected Hawking points as a function of the classiﬁcation score. The aligned trend of both
theoretical and empirical curves indicates maximized sensitivity of the neural network to the
Hawking points.

– 19 –

420246810Classification score0.00.20.40.60.81.0Fraction of positive samplesEmpiricalTheoreticalB Figure 17: Planck COMMANDER Anomalies

(a)

(c)

(e)

(g)

(i)

(b)

(d)

(f)

(h)

(j)

– 20 –

References

[1] V.G. Gurzadyan, R. Penrose, On CCC-predicted concentric low-variance circles in the CMB

sky Eur. Phys. J. Plus, 128 p.22 (2013)
[doi:10.1140/epjp/i2013-13022-4]

[2] R. Penrose, Cycles of Time: An Extraordinary New View of the Universe Bodley Head,

London, (2010)

[3] R. Penrose, The basic ideas of conformal cyclic cosmology AIP Conference Proceedings, 1446

233 (2012)
[doi:10.1063/1.4727997]

[4] K. P. Tod Isotropic cosmological singularities: other matter models Class. Quantum Grav., 521

20 (2003)
[doi:10.1088/0264-9381/20/3/309]

[5] K. P. Tod, The equations of CCC, arXiv: General Relativity and Quantum Cosmology, (2013)

[arXiv:1309.7248]

[6] V.G. Gurzadyan, R. Penrose, More on the low variance circles in CMB sky, (2010)

[arXiv:1012.1486]

[7] A. Moss, Douglas Scott, J.P. Zibin, No evidence for anomalously low variance circles on the

sky, Journal of Cosmology and Astroparticle Physics, 4, 4, (2010)
[arXiv:1012.1305]

[8] I.K. Wehus, H.K. Eriksen , A search for concentric circles in the 7-year WMAP temperature

sky maps, The Astrophysical Journal Letters, 733, 2, article id. L29, 6 pp. (2011)
[arXiv:1012.1268]

[9] V.G. Gurzadyan, A.E. Allahverdyan, T. Ghahramanyan, A.L. Kashin, H.G. Khachatryan, A.A.
Kocharyan, S. Mirzoyan, E. Poghosian, D. Vetrugno, G.Yegorian, A weakly random Universe?,
Astronomy and Astrophysics pg. 525. (2011)
[arXiv:1011.3711v2]

[10] A. DeAbreu, C. Dagoberto, and Douglas Scott, Searching for concentric low variance circles in
the cosmic microwave background, Journal of Cosmology and Astroparticle Physics pg. 12.
(2015)
[arXiv:1508.05158]

[11] P. Naselsky, W. Zhao, J. Kim, S. Chen, Is the Cosmic Microwave Background Asymmetry due

to the Kinematic Dipole The Astrophysical Journal, 749 (1) (2012)
[arXiv:1108.4376]

[12] Q. Yang, H. Yu, H. Di, Cosmic microwave background dipole asymmetry could be explained by

axion monodromy cosmic strings. Physics of the Dark Universe, 26 (2) (2019)
[arXiv:1712.09917]

[13] L. Santos, P. Cabella, T. Villela, A. Balbi, N. Vittorio, and C. A. Wuensche Quadrant

asymmetry in the angular distribution of cosmic microwave background in the Planck satellite
data Astronomy and Astrophysics, 569 (A75) (2014)
[doi:10.1051/0004-6361/201322943]

[14] J. Creswell, P. Naselsky Asymmetry of the CMB map: local and global anomalies Journal of

Cosmology and Astroparticle Physics, 103 03 (2021)
[arXiv:2102.13442]

[15] D. An, K. A. Meissner, P. Nurowski, R. Penrose, Apparent evidence for Hawking points in the

CMB Sky Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, (2020)
[arXiv:1808.01740]

– 21 –

[16] M. Lopez, P. Bonizzi, K. Driessens, G. Koekoek, J. de Vries, R. Westra, Searching for ring-like

structures in the Cosmic Microwave Background, Education, Physics (2021)
[Corpus ID: 234343106]

[17] D. L. Jow, Douglas Scott Re-evaluating evidence for Hawking points in the CMB, Journal of

Cosmology and Astroparticle Physics 021 (2020)
[arXiv:1909.09672]

[18] Planck 2018 results, V. CMB power spectra and likelihoods Cosmology (including clusters of

galaxies), 641 (A5) p.92 (2020)
[arXiv:1907.12875]

[19] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, J.Sun, Deep residual learning for image recognition Deep residual

learning for image recognition, (2016)
[arXiv:1512.03385]

[20] K. M. Gorski, B. D. Wandelt, E. Hivon, F. K. Hansen, and A. J. Banday, The HEALPix

primer. (1999) arXiv preprint astro-ph/9905275
[arXiv:9905275]

[21] Z. Liu, Z. Cen, V. Isenbaev, W. Liu, Z.S. Wu, B. Li, D. Zhao Constrained Variational Policy
Optimization for Safe Reinforcement Learning, In: DeepAI, RLDM22] The Multi-disciplinary
Conference on Reinforcement Learning and Decision Making (2022)
[DeepAI22]

[22] Planck Legacy Archive, [http://pla.esac.esa.int/pla/cosmology]

[23] Wilkilson Microwave Anisotropy Probe, [Data]

[24] H. Kaiming, X. Zhang, S. Ren, J. Sun, Springer International Publishing. Computer Vision –

ECCV 2016, (2016)
[ECCV16]

– 22 –

