2
2
0
2

g
u
A
5
1

]
E
S
.
s
c
[

1
v
7
4
4
7
0
.
8
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Comments on SPD-41 software licensing requirements

Response to RFI: Implementation and Changes to Science Policy Document
(SPD)-41: Science Information Policy

John D. Haiducek, john.haiducek@nrl.navy.mil1
1U.S. Naval Research Laboratory

18 February 2022

Abstract

The proposed changes to Science Missions Directorate (SMD) Policy Document
41 (SPD-41) include requirements that SMD-funded software should be released us-
ing a permissive software license and following best practices from the open source
software community. This is a welcome change that will lead to greater acceptance
and adoption of SMD-funded software. However, ambiguities exist in the policy text
around what licenses will be allowed. This could lead to problems in the solicitation
process and friction with the open source software community. Moreover, some ad-
ditional clariﬁcations are warranted around what exceptions might be allowed to the
software licensing policy.

Software licensing is currently a subject of friction between NASA, the scientiﬁc com-
munity, and the open source software community. This is largely the result of scientists
both inside and outside of NASA lacking knowledge around open source licensing. Many
scientists understand terms like “open source,” “free software,” and “permissive license”
to simply mean that the source code is available in some form. They are unaware of the
rigorous deﬁnitions applied by the Open Source Initiative (OSI) and Free Software Foun-
dation (FSF) that determine what licenses are considered acceptable by the Free/Open
Source Software (FOSS) community. Some scientists are resistant to the idea of releas-
ing their work as open source, wishing to hold their work close as a means of maintaining
a competitive edge or protecting their reputation. The proposed changes to SPD-41 will
help alleviate some of this friction, but ambiguities in the text will lead to continued misun-
derstandings. This could create problems in SMD solicitations and barriers to adoption of
software outside NASA.

How the proposed changes may impact the research and related ac-
tivities of SMD communities

The primary impact of the proposed software licensing requirements in SPD-41 will be to
encourage researchers to use permissive open source software licenses. This will beneﬁt
both NASA and the research community by making SMD-funded software more widely
available. Releasing software openly makes it possible for outside groups to use and
contribute to the software. Releasing it under a permissive license lowers the barriers to
adoption, maximizing the number of people who are able to beneﬁt from the work and
contribute improvements to the software.

Distribution A: Approved for public release;
Distribution unlimited

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
Lack of clarity in the SPD-41 language

Paragraph III.C.a. of the proposed revision to SPD-41 states that “SMD-funded software
should be released under a permissive license that has broad acceptance in the com-
munity.” Similarly, Paragraph V.B. requires that “research software developed using SMD
funding...should be released as open source.” The terms “open source” and “permissive
license” are deﬁned in Appendix B. The provided deﬁnitions are superﬁcially similar
to the deﬁnitions of “open source” and “free software” provided by the OSI [1] and
FSF [2], but are considerably less clear.

The deﬁnition of “open source software” provided in Appendix B. mentions a few of the
key FOSS principles, but others, such as the right to understand how a program works
and use it for any purpose, are omitted. The OSI and FSF deﬁnitions are mentioned,
but are characterized as informational rather than binding, with the words “OSS is
often distributed under licenses that comply with the deﬁnition of ‘Open source’ provided
by the Open Source Initiative or meet the deﬁnition of ‘Free Software’ provided by the Free
Software Foundation.” Thus it is unclear what role, if any, the OSI and FSF deﬁnitions will
play in implementation of SPD-41. This ambiguity could be used to justify claims that a
wide variety of license restrictions are consistent with SPD-41, including restrictions that
would render the license non-free or non-open under the OSI and FSF deﬁnitions.

The OSI deﬁnes a permissive license as being open source by deﬁnition [3], and thus
it is implied that a permissive license complies with all the terms in the OSI deﬁnition of
Open Source [1]. The same interpretation does not follow from the deﬁnition of “permis-
sive license” in SPD-41. Like the deﬁnition of “open source,” it summarizes a few FOSS
principles but leaves much to interpretation. The OSI and FSF deﬁnitions make it explicit
that the word “free” pertains to speciﬁc aspects of user freedom and not, for instance, to
the sale price of the software. SPD-41, on the other hand, does not specify what rights
and privileges are implied by “free use,” “free modiﬁcation,” and “free redistribu-
tion.”

Furthermore, it is not even clear whether the deﬁnitions of “permissive license” and
“open source software” in Appendix B. are intended to be a binding part of the policy,
or merely information provided to aid the reader in understanding. As a result, a person
reading the proposed policy text might simply read the words “permissive license” and in-
terpret language in a manner suitable to their interests, ignoring even the loose deﬁnitions
provided in the appendix.

From reading the proposed SPD-41 text, it is also not clear whether SMD will fund
modiﬁcation of existing software that does not use a permissive license. A strict
interpretation of paragraph III.C.a. would suggest that this will not be permitted. However,
paragraph II.D.a. states that information subject to “patent or intellectual property law”
may be eligible for exceptions under SPD-41. It is conceivable that SMD might use this
clause as grounds to allow exceptions to SPD-41 for any work that proposes to modify
existing software. Or an exception might only be made for cases involving modiﬁcation of
software for which the SMD-funded developers are not authorized to change the license.
Finally, paragraph II.B.c. of SPD-41 provides deﬁnition of “software” that includes
the unusual constraint that the code provide “some degree of scientiﬁc utility or produce a
scientiﬁc result or service” in order to be considered software. This could lead to confusion

Distribution A: Approved for public release;
Distribution unlimited

2

as to the applicability of SPD-41 to software that is not directly related to science.

Barriers to adoption

The proposed policy changes should be expected to lower barriers adoption for any
software whose development is funded by SMD. The requirement to release software un-
der an permissive license that has “broad acceptance in the community” will undoubtedly
make the software more available to the broader community. However, differences be-
tween the deﬁnitions in SPD-41 Appendix B and the FOSS deﬁnitions provided by
OSI and FSF could lead to continued friction between NASA and the open source
software community.

In the past, subtle problems with license language have led to licenses being rejected
by OSI and/or FSF, a notable example being the NASA Open Source Agreement (NOSA),
which was approved by OSI as an open source license [4] but rejected by FSF as being
non-free [5]. The impact of this goes beyond criticism on a web page, because com-
pliance with the OSI and FSF deﬁnitions is used to determine whether a software is
eligible for inclusion in software repositories and operating systems.
In the past, some
NASA-developed software has been rejected for inclusion in Linux distributions because
of license language, despite community interest in having the software included [6, 7].
Issues like this have been identiﬁed both inside and outside NASA as barriers to adoption
of NASA-funded software [8, 9].

Given the history of friction between NASA and the open source software community,
considerable care is warranted in addressing this. The proposed changes to SPD-41 do
constitute an improvement over previous policies and practices. However, ambiguities in
the policy text mean that some licenses may be allowed under SPD-41 that do not
pass muster with the FOSS community. Although this could be addressed by revising
the deﬁnitions in Appendix B (and making it clear that they are binding), a better approach
would be to simply require the use of software licenses that comply with both the
OSI and FSF deﬁnitions, rather than attempting to create a new deﬁnition. Furthermore,
“broad acceptance in the community” should be clariﬁed to mean acceptance by both OSI
and FSF. This would ensure the broadest possible acceptance of SMD-funded software
within the open source software community.

Fairness in solicitations

As a result of the ambiguity in various parts of the proposed text, the software licensing
requirements in SPD-41 will likely be interpreted differently by some scientists than by
others. This could lead to problems of fairness in the solicitation process. Some proposal
writers might interpret the policy strictly, while others might interpret it more loosely.

Those who interpret the policy more strictly than NASA intends might needlessly re-
strict the scope of their proposed work. For instance, they might choose not to propose
certain work because it would require modifying existing software that is distributed under
a non-permissive license. Or they might propose to create new software to support their
work rather than modify existing software that uses a non-permissive license. Thus pro-

Distribution A: Approved for public release;
Distribution unlimited

3

posal teams that strictly interpret the software licensing provisions in SPD-41 could ﬁnd
themselves at a disadvantage relative to their competition.

Those who interpret the policy more loosely than NASA intends would encounter a
different problem. They might expend effort writing a proposal that the believe to be in
compliance, but which uses a license that is non-compliant in some way. This could
lead to proposals being rejected solely due to software licensing issues or to late-stage
modiﬁcations to comply with SPD-41 policy, which could be avoided by having clearer
language in SPD-41.

Another issue that can arise in solicitations is that proposals may provide insufﬁcient
information to determine whether the proposed work will comply with SPD-41. For in-
stance, a proposal might commit generally to using a permissive license, without speci-
fying what software license will be used. In such cases, the proposal team might intend
to use a non-FOSS or non-permissive license which they mistakenly believe will be in
compliance with SPD-41. If the proposal did not specify what license will be used, SMD
would not be aware of the problem until later in the process. To prevent this, SMD should
consider requiring all proposals provide a list of all software products the proposers
anticipate creating or modifying, and what software license will apply to each.

Applicability to third-party software

It is possible that the requirement to distribute SMD-funded software under a permissive
license might prevent SMD from funding work that involves modiﬁcations to existing soft-
ware. Many established scientiﬁc codes are treated as proprietary and distributed with
a restrictive license or with no license. Others are distributed under copyleft (i.e. non-
permissive) open source licenses. While the copyright holders are free to change the
licenses of these codes in order to comply with the provisions of SPD-41, others do not
have this ability. As discussed above, paragraph II.D.a. of SPD-41 seems to allow a
way for SMD to make exceptions to allow SMD to fund modiﬁcations of third party soft-
ware that is not in compliance with paragraph III.C.a. If such exceptions are not allowed,
the software licensing requirements could signiﬁcantly restrict the software development
activities that SMD is able to fund.

Effects on solicitation responses

Lack of comfort or familiarity with FOSS licenses could cause some scientists to become
hesitant in proposing to SMD solicitations. Scientists who are unfamiliar with FOSS li-
censes might lack conﬁdence in choosing a license for their project. Others might prefer
not to use FOSS licenses due to a desire to maintain a competitive advantage relative
to their peers, to prevent commercial users proﬁting off their work, or to protect them-
selves from reputational harm resulting from misuse of their software. Others might be
comfortable with FOSS licenses but be confused by SMD policy language around licens-
ing. Clearer policy language and better education and outreach around software licensing
would help address these problems and maintain robust responses to SMD solicitations.

Distribution A: Approved for public release;
Distribution unlimited

4

Support, training, and guidance needed to support successful imple-
mentation of the policy

Relatively few scientists are well versed in the subtleties of software licensing. As
a result, SMD should plan to provide guidance to help scientists with choosing software
licenses that will be compliant with SPD-41. Even those who are knowledgeable in this
area will require additional guidance on how SPD-41 will be implemented, especially if
ambiguities in the policy are not addressed in a future revision.

Education on software licensing

Scientists proposing to SMD may require additional education about software licensing
in order to comply with the proposed SPD-41 changes. This includes training on the
following topics:

• Considerations for choosing a software license

• How to determine whether a license complies with SPD-41

• What existing licenses are in compliance with SPD-41

• How developers can protect their own interests while distributing their work under a

permissive license

• How the use of a permissive license can beneﬁt software developers, SMD, and the

wider community

Guidance on how SPD-41 will be implemented

As noted earlier, there are several aspects of software licensing policy that are poorly
deﬁned in SPD-41.
Ideally, some of this ambiguity should be removed by revising
the policy itself. If the current text becomes policy, SMD stakeholders will need guidance
in the following areas to address aspects of implementation that are not fully addressed
in the SPD-41 text:

• How SMD will determine whether SPD-41 applies to a particular piece of software

• How SMD will determine whether a license is “permissive”

• How SMD will determine whether a license has “broad acceptance in the commu-

nity”

• Under what circumstances, if any, SMD will make exceptions to fund modiﬁcations to
existing software that does not meet the proposed software licensing requirements

• What information about software licensing needs to be provided in proposals to SMD

Distribution A: Approved for public release;
Distribution unlimited

5

Bibliography

[1] Open Source Initiative, “The Open Source Deﬁnition,” https://opensource.org/docs/osd.

[2] Free Software Foundation, “What is Free Software?” https://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-sw.html.

[3] Open Source Initiative, “Frequently Answered Questions,” https://opensource.org/faq.

[4] ——, “Open Source Licenses by Category,” https://opensource.org/licenses/category.

[5] Free

“Various
https://www.gnu.org/licenses/license-list.html.

Foundation,

Software

Licenses

and

Comments

about

Them,”

[6] “Review

-
https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show bug.cgi?format=multiple&id=494520.

Common

Request:

NASA

The

Cdf

Data

Format

implementation,”

[7] Fedora Project, “Licensing:Main - Fedora Project Wiki,” https://fedoraproject.org/wiki/Licensing:Main?rd=Licensing.

[8] National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, Open Source Software Policy Options for

NASA Earth and Space Sciences. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press, 2018.

[9] R. A. Beyer, T. Fong, M. B. Allan, J. Laura, M. P. Milazzo, R. G. Deen, and W. M. Burke, “No to NOSA,
Yes to Mainstream Licenses,” National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., Tech. Rep. 25217 28, Dec.
2018.

Distribution A: Approved for public release;
Distribution unlimited

6

