2
2
0
2

g
u
A
5
2

]
E
S
.
s
c
[

1
v
7
4
9
1
1
.
8
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

TEP-GNN: Accurate Execution Time Prediction of Functional
Tests using Graph Neural Networks

Hazem Peter Samoaa
Chalmers University of Technology
Gothenburg, Sweden
samoaa@chalmers.se

Antonio Longa
Fondazione Bruno Kessler and
University of Trento
Trento, Italy
alonga@fbk.eu

Mazen Mohamad
University of Gothenburg
Gothenburg, Sweden
mazen.mohamad@gu.se

Morteza Haghir Chehreghani
Chalmers University of Technology
Gothenburg, Sweden
morteza.chehreghani@chalmers.se

Philipp Leitner
Chalmers | University of Gothenburg
Gothenburg, Sweden
philipp.leitner@chalmers.se

ABSTRACT
Predicting the performance of production code prior to actually
executing or benchmarking it is known to be highly challenging. In
this paper, we propose a predictive model, dubbed TEP-GNN, which
demonstrates that high-accuracy performance prediction is possible
for the special case of predicting unit test execution times. TEP-
GNN uses FA-ASTs, or flow-augmented ASTs, as a graph-based code
representation approach, and predicts test execution times using a
powerful graph neural network (GNN) deep learning model. We
evaluate TEP-GNN using four real-life Java open source programs,
based on 922 test files mined from the projects’ public repositories.
We find that our approach achieves a high Pearson correlation of
0.789, considerable outperforming a baseline deep learning model.
However, we also find that more work is needed for trained models
to generalize to unseen projects. Our work demonstrates that FA-
ASTs and GNNs are a feasible approach for predicting absolute
performance values, and serves as an important intermediary step
towards being able to predict the performance of arbitrary code
prior to execution.

1 INTRODUCTION
Performance is a critical quality property of many real-live software
systems. Hence, performance modeling and analysis have gradually
become an increasingly important part of the software development
life-cycle. Unfortunately, predicting the performance of real-life
production code is well-known to be a difficult problem – predicting
the absolute execution time of applications based on code structure
is challenging as it is a function of many factors, including the un-
derlying architecture, the input parameters, and the application’s
interactions with the operating system [24]. Consequently, works

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
© 2022 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

that attempted to predict absolute performance counters (e.g., exe-
cution time) for arbitrary applications from source code generally
report poor accuracy [21, 23].

However, recent research has shown that predicting performance
characteristics is indeed possible in more specialized contexts, via
the application of modern machine learning architectures. For ex-
ample, Guo et al. successfully predict the execution time of a specific
untested configuration of a configurable system [7, 8], Samoaa and
Leitner have shown that the execution time of a benchmark with
specific workload configuration can be predicted [26], and Laaber
et al. have shown that a categorical classification of benchmarks
into high- or low-variability is feasible [13].

In this work, we demonstrate that another context where per-
formance prediction is possible is the prediction of execution times
of functional tests. Test execution times are crucial in agile soft-
ware development and continuous integration. While individual
test cases might have short execution times, software products of-
ten have thousands of test cases, which makes the total execution
time in the build process high. Researchers have been working on
solutions to speed up the testing process by optimizing the code
or prioritizing test cases [5, 12, 20, 30]. The goal of this study is to
provide the developers with predictions of the execution times of
their test cases, and consequently giving them an early indication
of the time required to run the cases in the build process. We believe
that this would support decisions regarding code optimization and
test case selection in early stages of the software life-cycle.

In this paper, we propose an approach dubbed TEP-GNN (Test
Execution Time Prediction using Graph Neural Networks) that
makes use of structural features of test cases (the abstract syntax
tree, AST). In TEP-GNN we enrich the AST with various types of
edges representing data and control flow. Following Wang and Jin,
we refer to this resulting graph as flow-augmented abstract syntax
trees (FA-AST) [33]. We apply a graph neural network (GNN) deep
learning model, more specifically GraphConv [22], on the resulting
FA-ASTs to predict execution times. We train and test our model
on a dataset collected from four well-known open source projects
2, a
hosted on GitHub: H2 database
3, an Apache project to
project for handling RDF data, systemDS

1, a relational database, RDF4J

1https://github.com/h2database/h2database
2https://github.com/eclipse/rdf4j
3https://github.com/apache/systemds

 
 
 
 
 
 
manage the data science life cycle, and finally the Apache remote
4. As labelled ground truth data, we
procedure call library Dubbo
collect 922 real test execution traces from these projects’ publicly
available build systems.

We conduct experiments with our TEP-GNN model to answer

the following research questions:

• RQ1: How accurately can the absolute execution time of a
test file consisting of one or multiple test cases be predicted
using FA-ASTs and GNNs?

• RQ2: Does our usage of GraphConv improve execution time
prediction compared to a baseline using Gated Graph Neural
Networks (GGNN), as frequently used in previous software
engineering research [1, 6]?

• RQ3: How well are models trained on a subset of projects
transferable to unseen other projects? Can a TEP-GNN model
trained on a subset of projects predict the execution time of
tests in a project that was not used during training?

Our results show that using TEP-GNN, test execution time can be
predicted with a very high prediction accuracy (Pearson correlation
of 0.789). Further, we show that our usage of GraphConv indeed
improves the model significantly over GGNN. Finally, we show that
trained models are not easily transferable. We conclude that test
execution times can indeed be predicted using GNN models with
high accuracy, even based on performance counters that have been
collected "in the wild" by real projects (as opposed to performance
measurements collected on a dedicated performance testing ma-
chine). Even though test cases are shorter and structurally simpler
than arbitrary programs, we see our results as an important step-
ping stone towards the prediction of the performance of arbitrary
software systems prior to execution. However, more work is needed
to train general models that can be applied to arbitrary, unseen
projects.

2 THE TEP-GNN APPROACH
In this section, we introduce TEP-GNN. We first provide a general
overview of the model and discuss the problem addressed in this
paper, followed by a detailed discussion of the main components
of TEP-GNN (FA-ASTs and the machine learning pipeline based on
the GraphConv [22] higher order GNN).

2.1 Approach Overview
Our goal in this paper is to predict the execution time of test cases
based on static code information alone, i.e., without access to prior
benchmarking of the test case or dynamic analysis data. The general
procedure of our TEP-GNN approach is sketched in Figure 1. To
process a test file, we first parse it into its AST. Next, we build
a graph representation (FA-AST) by adding edges representing
control and data flow to the AST. We then initialize the embeddings
of FA-AST nodes and edges before jointly feeding a vectorized FA-
AST into a GNN. We use a 3-layer higher order graph convolution
neural network to predict the execution time. Each layer is followed
by a ReLU activation function. Since GNN learns node embedding,
we use global max pooling to compute a graph embedding. Finally,
the graph embedding goes into two Linear layers with a ReLU and

4https://github.com/apache/dubbo

a sigmoid activation function to perform the prediction of the test
execution time. To train our model we use the mean square error
loss.

2.2 Problem Definition
Given a test file (source code containing one or multiple test cases)
𝐶𝑖 and the corresponding run-time value 𝑋𝑖 (execution time of all
test cases in the file), for a set of test files with known execution
times we can build a training set 𝐷 = (𝐶𝑖, 𝑋𝑖). We aim to train a
deep learning model for learning a function 𝜙 that maps a test file
𝐶𝑖 to a feature vector 𝑣 mapped to the corresponding value 𝑋𝑖 .

2.3 Building Flow-Augmented Abstract Syntax

Trees

Recent studies [27] emphasize the importance of the code represen-
tation when using deep learning in software engineering. Hence,
and given the complexity of predicting performance, prediction
based on the syntactical information extracted from ASTs alone is
not sufficient to achieve high-quality predictions. In TEP-GNN, the
basic structural information provided by the AST is enriched with
semantic information representing data and control flow. Conse-
quently, the tree structure of the AST is generalized to a (substan-
tially richer) graph, encoding more information than code structure
alone. This idea is based on the earlier work by Wang and Jin [33],
who have also introduced the term FA-AST for this kind of source
code representation.

org . junit . jupiter . api . Assertions . assertEquals ;

1 package org . myorg . weather . tests ;
2
3 import static
4
5 import org . myorg . weather . WeatherAPI ;
6 import org . myorg . weather . Flags ;
7
8 public class WeatherAPITest {
9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

WeatherAPI api = new WeatherAPI () ;

@Test
public void testTemperatureOutput () {

double currentTemp = api . currentTemp () ;
Flags f = api . getFreezeFlag () ;
if ( currentTemp <= 3.0 d)

assertEquals ( Flags . FREEZE , f);

else

assertEquals ( Flags . THAW , f);

}

20
21 }

Listing 1: A Simple JUnit 5 Test Case

2.3.1 AST Parsing. We demonstrate our approach for constructing
FA-ASTs for test files using the example of a Java JUnit 5 test case
(see Listing 1). In this example, a single test case testTemperature-
Output() is presented that tests a feature of an (imaginary) API.
As common for test cases, the example is short and structurally
relatively simple. Much of the body of the test case consists of
invocations to the system-under-test and calls of JUnit standard
methods, such as assertEquals. We speculate that these proper-
ties make predicting test execution time a more tractable problem

Figure 1: Schematic overview of the main phases of TEP-GNN. Java unit tests are parsed into ASTs, which get augmented with
control and data flow edges. The resulting graph is then used as input for a GNN.

than predicting performance of general-purpose programs, which
previous authors have argued to be extremely challenging [21, 23].

Figure 2: Simplified abstract syntax tree (AST) representing
the illustrative example presented in Listing 1. Package dec-
larations, import statements, as well as the declaration in
Line 15 are skipped for brevity.

A (slightly simplified) AST for this illustrative example is de-
picted in Figure 2. The produced AST does not contain purely
syntactical elements, such as comments, brackets, or code location
information. We make use of the pure Python Java parser javalang5
to parse each test file, and use the node types, values, and produc-
tion rules in javalang to describe our ASTs.

2.3.2 Capturing Ordering and Data Flow. In the next step, we aug-
ment this AST with different types of additional edges representing
data flow and node order in the AST. Specifically, we use the fol-
lowing additional flow augmentation edges, in addition to the AST
child and AST parent edges that are produced readily by AST
parsing:

FA Next Token (b):

This type of edge connects a terminal node (leaf) in the AST to
the next terminal node. Terminal nodes are nodes without children.
In Figure 2, an FA Next Token edge would be added, for example,
between WeatherAPI and api.

5https://pypi.org/project/javalang/

FA Next Sibling (c):

This connects each node (both terminal and non-terminal) to its
next sibling. This allows us to model the order of instructions in
an otherwise unordered graph structure. In Figure 2, such an edge
would be added, for example, connecting the first usage of api and
with the CONSTR node (representing a Java constructor call).

FA Next Use (d):

This type of edge connects a node representing a variable to the
place where this variable is next used. For example, the variable
api is declared in Line 10 in Listing 1, and then used next in Line
14.

Figure 3 shows an example augmenting the AST in Figure 2
(and, consequently, the example test case in Listing 1). Solid black
lines indicate the AST parent and child relationships (for simplicity
indicated through a single arrow, read from top to bottom). Red
dashed arrows refer to the new edges added to represent the data
and control flow in the FA-AST, with letter codes indicating the
edge type. Terminal nodes are connected with FA Next Token edges
(b), modelling the order of terminals in the test case. Similarly, the
ordering of siblings is modelled using FA Next Sibling edges (c).
Finally, data flow is modelled by connecting each variable to their
next usage via FA Next Use edges (d). Edge types (e), (f), and (i)
represent a control flow statement, which will be discussed in the
following. Multiple edges of different types are possible between
the same nodes. For example, the terminal nodes Flags.FREEZE
and f are connected via both, an FA Next Token (b) and an FA Next
Sibling (c) edge.

2.3.3 Capturing Control Flow. In a second augmentation step, we
now add further edges representing the control flow in the test
cases. We currently support if statements, while and for loops, as
well as sequential execution. We currently do not support switch
statements or do-while loops, as these are less common in test cases.
Test files containing these elements will still be parsed successfully,
but these control flow constructs will not be captured by the FA-AST.
Specifically, the following further edges are added:

FA If Flow (e):

This type of edge connects the predicate (condition) of the if-
statement with the code block that is executed if the condition
evaluates to true. Every if statement contains exactly one such
edge by construction.
FA Else Flow (f):

Conversely, this edge type connects the predicate to the (optional)
else code block. Figure 4 depicts how if-statements are modelled.

FA While Flow (g):

A while loop essentially entails two elements - a condition and a

testTemperatureOutputDECLdouble=currentTempCALLcurrentTempDECL…IFPRED<=currentTempLIT3.0dIF-BLOCKCALLassertEqualsARGSFlags.FREEZEfELSE-BLOCKCALLassertEqualsARGSFlags.THAWfCUWeatherAPITestPACKAGE…IMPORT…CLASSDECLWeatherAPI=apiCONSTRWeatherAPIapiFigure 3: Flow-Augmented AST (FA-AST) for the example presented in Listing 1. Solid lines represent AST parent and child
edges, and dashed lines different types of flow augmentations.

Figure 4: Capturing the control flow of if statements.

code block that is executed as long as the condition remains true.
We capture this through a FA While Flow (g) edge connecting the
condition to the code block, and an FA Next Use (d) edge in the
reverse direction. The latter is used to model the next usage of a
loop counter. Figure 5 shows this.

FA For Flow (h):

For loops are conceptually similar to while loops. We use FA For
Flow (h) edges to connect the condition to the code block, and
an FA Next Use (d) edge in the reverse direction. Similar to the
modelling of while-loops, FA Next Use (d) relates to the usage
(typically incrementing) of a loop counter. This is again illustrated
in Figure 6.

Figure 5: Capturing the control flow of while loops.

Figure 6: Capturing the control flow of for loops.

FA Next Statement Flow (i):

In addition to the control flow constructs discussed so far, Java of

testTemperatureOutputDECLdouble=currentTempCALLcurrentTempDECL…IFPRED<=currentTempLIT3.0dIF-BLOCKCALLassertEqualsARGSFlags.FREEZEfELSE-BLOCKCALLassertEqualsARGSFlags.THAWfCUWeatherAPITestPACKAGE…IMPORT…CLASSDECLWeatherAPI=apiCONSTRWeatherAPIapi(c)(c)(c)(c)(b)(c)(b)(b)(d)(c)(d)(b)(b)(c)(b)(c)(b)(b)(c)(b)(b)(b)(c)(c)(e)(f)Legend:AST edge(b)FA Next Token(c)FA Next Sibling(d)FA Next Use(e)FA If Flow(f)FA Else Flow(i)(i)FA Next Statement Flow(i)(i)(i)(i)(i)(i)(c)(c)(c)(c)(c)(c)IFPREDIF-BLOCKELSE-BLOCK(e)(f)AST edge(e)FA If Flow(f)FA Else FlowWHILECONDBLOCK(g)AST edge(g)FA While Flow(d)FA Next Use(d)FORCONDBLOCK(h)AST edge(h)FA For Flow(d)FA Next Use(d)course also supports the simple sequential execution of multiple
statements in a sequence within a code block. FA Next Statement
Flow edges (i) are used to represent this case. Different from the
constructs discussed so far, a code block can contain an arbitrary
number of children, and the FA Next Statement Flow edge is always
used to connect each statement to the one directly following it. An
illustration is shown in Figure 7.

Referring back to Figure 3, two types of control flow annota-
tions are visible - the modelling of the if-statement in lines 16 to
19 of the test case on the right-hand side, and various sequential
executions (FA Next Statement flow (i) ) edges. Further note how
flow annotation adds a large number of edges to even a very small
AST, transforming the syntax tree into a densely connected graph.
This rich additional information can be used in the next step by our
GNN model to predict highly accurate test execution times.

Figure 7: Capturing the control flow of sequential execution.

2.4 GNN Model for Test Execution Time

Prediction

Once the FA-AST graph has been built for a test file using the three
steps discussed above, we use a higher order GNN model to predict
the execution time of the Java code.

Graphs are complex structures, verifying if two graphs are iden-
tical (also known as isomorphism test) is an important and difficult
task. It is unknown if the problem can be solved in polynomial
time or it is computationally intractable for large graphs. A fast
heuristic to verify if two graph are the same is the 𝑘-Weisfeiler-
Leman test [34]. The algorithm produces for each graph a canonical
form. Then, if the canonical forms of two graphs are not equivalent,
the graphs are not considered isomorphic. However, there is the
possibility that two non-isomorphic graphs share a canonical form.
Thereby, this test might not provide a conclusive evidence that two
graphs are isomorphic. Morris et al. [22] prove that a GNN network
can be as powerful as the 𝑘-Weisfeiler-Leman test with 𝑘 equal
to 1, in which the canonical form propagates the information by
nodes. With 𝑘 greater than 1, the information is propagated among
substructures of order 𝑘. Morris et al. [22] also propose a higher
order graph convolution layer (𝑘-GNN), wherein messages are ex-
changed among nodes, edges and substructure with tree nodes
(triads). Once messages are exchanged among substructures, each
node has a latent representation. In order to predict property of
the graphs (i.e., the execution time of a graph representing Java
code), node embeddings are globally aggregated (pooling step) with
an ordering invariant function (i.e. sum, max, mean). In particular,
𝑘-GNN is defined as: given is an integer 𝑘 the 𝑘-element subset
[𝑉 (𝐺)]𝑘 over 𝑉 (𝐺). Let 𝑠 = {𝑠1, 𝑠2, . . . } be 𝑘-set in [𝑉 (𝐺)]𝑘 , then

the neighborhood of 𝑠 is defined as:

𝑁 (𝑠) = {𝑡 ∈ [𝑉 (𝐺)]𝑘 ||𝑠 ∪ 𝑡 | = 𝑘 − 1}
In Equation 1, the neighbour of a 𝑘-set is defined as the set of 𝑘-set
such that the intersection of their cardinality is equal to 𝑘 − 1. The
local neighborhood is defined as:

(1)

𝑁𝐿 (𝑠) = {𝑡 ∈ 𝑁 (𝑠)|(𝑢, 𝑤) ∈ 𝐸 (𝐺) with 𝑢 ∈ 𝑠/𝑡 and 𝑤 ∈ 𝑡/𝑠} (2)
The local neighborhood defined in Equation 2 is a subset of the
neighbour (eq. 1). Finally, the 𝑘-GNN is defined as:
(𝑠) · 𝑊 (𝑡 )

𝑓 (𝑙)
𝑘,𝐿 (𝑠) = 𝜎 (𝑓 (𝑙−1)

(𝑢) · 𝑊 (𝑡 )
2 )

𝑓 (𝑡 −1)
𝑘,𝐿

1 +

∑︁

(3)

𝑘,𝐿

𝑢 ∈𝑁𝐿 (𝑠)

The 𝑙-th layer of the 𝑘-GNN computes an embedding of 𝑠, using the
non linear activation function 𝜎 of the summation over the substruc-
ture itself in the previous layer (i.e., layer 𝑙 − 1) and the summation
over the previous layer embedding of each local neighbor of the
substructure 𝑠. A scheme of the deep learning architecture we use
in TEP-GNN is shown in Figure 8. Due to the proven superiority
of higher order GNN with respect to classic GNN [22], we adopt
GraphConv, a PyTorch-geometric implementation of the higher
order Graph Neural Network layer. The GNN is composed of three
convolutional layers, each layer has a GraphConv layer with an
ReLU activation function and a batch normalization. Then node
embeddings are converted into a graph embedding using a global
max pooling layer. Finally, the predicted execution time is predicted
using two multi-layers perceptrons with ReLU and sigmoid activa-
tion functions. We use the Mean Square Error as the loss function.
In order to make the learning easier for the neural network, and to
reduce the optimization problems, real execution times have been
normalized between 0 and 1.

3 EVALUATION
We now present the results of an experimental evaluation of TEP-
GNN based on open source Java projects. As training and test data
we make use of existing test suite execution traces from the study
subjects’ build systems. A replication package containing the scripts
used to implement the TEP-GNN approach, all data used in the
evaluation, as well as all analysis scripts, are available [9].

3.1 Dataset
Related studies in performance engineering frequently collect their
own performance data, for example by repeated execution of the
projects on a researcher’s laptop [28], in cloud virtual machines [14],
or on controlled hardware [29]. To increase the realism of the study
we have chosen a different approach – we harvest existing execution
traces from an open source build system (GitHub), and extract test
execution times from this public data. This data represents actual,
real-life test execution times. However, we do not have the option
to collect more data on-demand, and we do not know what precise
hardware has been used to collect the data.

To collect the data, we searched for projects to serve as study
subjects. We applied the following selection criteria: (i) projects
written in Java; (ii) available on GitHub; (iii) include test results
published on GitHub; and (iv) use GitHub shared runners as build
system.

BLOCKCALLCALL(i)AST edge(i)FA Next Statement FlowCALL(i)Figure 8: Architecture of the GNN Model used in TEP-GNN.

Table 1: Overview of study subjects.

Project
systemDS

H2
Dubbo

RDF4J

Total

Description

Apache Machine Learning system
for data science lifecycle
Java SQL database
Apache Remote Procedure Call
framework
Scalable RDF processing for Java

Test files
127

Test runs
1321

Number of nodes Vocabulary size
110651

3161

194
123

478

922

1391
524

1055

4291

405706
75787

214436

806580

17972
4499

10755

36387

Based on these criteria, we selected four projects of diverse
application domains, i.e., databases, web servers, and data science
life-cycle (systemDS, H2, Dubbo, and RDF4J). These are depicted
in Table 1. The first column shows the project’s name, the second
provides a brief description of the project. The third column shows
the number of distinct test files extracted from the project. As for
the fourth column, it shows the total number of runs performed
in the testing job. The last two columns show the total number of
tokens in the entire project test files and the vocabulary size (the
number of distinct nodes in the graphs). We observe that RDF4J, a
triplestore database used in semantic web contexts [25], contains
more test files than the other projects. For the H2 relational database
and systemDS we were able to collect the most test runs. Finally, it
should be noted that H2 has the highest code density as measured
by the number of nodes and the resulting vocabulary size by a wide
margin. This indicates that H2 tests are generally larger and more
complex than the test cases in the other study subjects.

All data was extracted from GitHub-hosted runners, which are
virtual machines hosted by GitHub with the GitHub Actions runner
application installed. All shared runners can be assumed to use the
same hardware resources, which is available at GitHub’s website6
and each job runs in a fresh instance of the virtual machine. Ad-
ditionally, all jobs from which the data is extracted uses the same

operating system, specifically Ubuntu 18.04. This allows us to min-
imize bias introduced by variations in execution environment or
hardware.

For collecting test execution traces we looked at the latest suc-
cessful action workflow run for each project. We then extracted
the run times from the test report in the workflow, and mined the
corresponding source code files from the respective project reposi-
tories in order to feed them to the parser. For H2, some test cases
are run several times during the same build job. In these cases, we
recorded the average of the run times. As the execution times of
tests can vary dramatically between and within projects, to increase
the efficiency of the model training, we normalize each execution
time to interval [0; 1]. Hence, our final dataset includes distinct
test files, each associated with one runtime value between 0 and 1.
Then after model training, we denormalize the runtime value and
present the results based on the original values.

Table 2 indicates how prevalent different control flow nodes
were in the test cases of our study subjects. For all projects, block
statements are the most frequent control flow construct, since se-
quential executions widely exist in nearly all programs. For loops
are substantially more common than while loops, and if statements
are also frequent. Do-while loops and switch statements, which
are currently unsupported by TEP-GNN, are both quite rare in the
tests of our subjects (not shown in the table).

6https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-github-hosted-runners/about-github-
hosted-runners#supported-runners-and-hardware-resources

Table 2: Occurrences of Control Flow Nodes in Each Project

Control Flow
Statement
If Statement
While Loop
ForStatement
Block
ment

State-

systemDS H2

Dubbo RDF4J

166
2
196
293

1322
222
1114
2900

53
3
42
116

161
22
158
395

Total

707

5612

214

736

3.2 Results
In this section, we investigate the results of applying TEP-GNN to
our dataset, answering RQ1 – RQ3 introduced in Section 1.

3.2.1 RQ1: Quality of Predictions. In order to answer the first re-
search question, we combine the collected data for all projects into
one dataset entailing 922 code fragments and associated normal-
ized execution times. After that, we apply TEP-GNN as discussed
in Section 2. For model training, we split the dataset into train and
test sets using 80% and 20%, respectively. Each network is trained
for 100 epochs. As optimizer we use Adam [11] with a learning rate
= 0.001. To evaluate the results of our model, we use a Pearson
correlation metric, a measure of linear correlation between two sets
of data. In addition, as a loss function, we use mean squared error,
which is the average squared difference between the estimated and
actual values. All experiments have been executed in a machine
equipped with a GeForce 940MX graphics card and 16GB of RAM.

Table 3: Results of the TEP-GNN on the entire dataset

Pearson corre-
lation
0.789

Mean squared
error
0.017

Results are shown in Table 3. Our model trained on FA-AST is
able to predict test execution times with a very high accuracy, as can
be seen in the Pearson correlation (between predicted and actual
execution times in the test data set) of 0.789, and a mean squared
error of 0.017. These results substantially outperform the accuracy
values reported in previous studies that attempted to predict abso-
lute software performance counters [21, 23]. We argue that the key
innovation that enables this high accuracy is the combination of
FA-AST as a powerful code representation model and GraphConv
as a modern GNN.

3.2.2 RQ2: Comparison of TEP-GNN Against a Baseline GNN. To
validate the suitability of our approach and the selected GNN model,
we compare it to a commonly used GNN baseline, called Gated
Graph Neural Networks (GGNN)[17]. GGNNs are widely used in
studies that attempt to learn code semantics [1, 6]. We compare
the methods at two levels – for the entire dataset (similar to the
analysis presented for RQ1) and at the level of individual projects.

Comparison for the entire dataset. We first apply both TEP-
GNN and the baseline method to the dataset consisting of all
projects. Figure 9 depicts the respective results. Our model out-
performs the baseline, with a Pearson correlation that is higher
almost up to 0.1 (i.e., 0.789 versus 0.697). Hence, we conclude that
our model and GNN architecture is indeed more appropriate to pre-
dict the execution time of test cases than a more standard GGNN
approach.

Figure 9: Comparison of TEP-GNN and a baseline (applying
GGNN to the same FA-AST graphs). Dot points show real (y
axes) and predicted (x axes) execution times produced by our
model. The dash line refers to the perfect prediction.

Analyzing the results, we observe that TEP-GNN is able to
achieve highly accurate predictions in most cases. However, there
are rare outliers where our prediction model misses by approxi-
mately 20%. The baseline GGNN method, on the other hand, has
a tendency to predict fairly uniform execution times between 102
and 103, almost independent of what the actually observed test
execution time is. Hence, it suffers from lower accuracy scores.

Comparison for individual projects. In the next step, we con-
duct a similar analysis, but focused on individual projects. This
study answers the question of how well TEP-GNN works if trained
on and used by a single project. Thus, we train and test TEP-GNN
and the baseline on each of the four projects individually. The
results for each project are depicted in Figure 10.

We observe that in general the prediction quality is substantially
lower if the model is trained on individual projects, both for TEP-
GNN and the baseline. TEP-GNN still outperforms the baseline for
each project, but only with negligible prediction performance differ-
ences in the case of H2 and Dubbo. For RDF4J, which contains the
largest number of test cases (and, consequently, the largest number
of graphs to learn from), the difference between our approach and
the baseline remains larger.

From these results we conclude that (a) TEP-GNN indeed outper-
forms the baseline in all the settings we tested, but (b) our approach
works best if sufficient training graphs are available in comparison
to the size of the graphs and vocabulary (if graphs are complex
and/or training data is sparse the difference between our approach
and the baseline is insignificant); (c) finally, we conclude that both
approaches appear to learn some transferable knowledge even when
training on graphs that originate from a different project.

Figure 10: Overview of TEP-GNN and the GGNN baseline trained for each individual project.

3.2.3 RQ3: Evaluation of Models Trained on Different Projects. Based
on the third conclusion above, we now raise the question if it is
possible to build a generic model trained on a subset of projects and
apply it to a new (unseen) project. Hence, we now train new TEP-
GNN models using three of the projects in our dataset, and test on
the fourth one. The results for all four combinations are shown in
Figure 11.

We observe that the quality of predictions in this setting is in
general rather disappointing, ranging from a Pearson correlation
of 0.381 when testing on the H2 database to -0.02 when testing
on systemDS. Interestingly, H2, which has the structurally most
complex test cases in our study subjects, seems to perform better
with a transferred model than the other projects, where test cases
tend to be simpler. This is likely due to the test cases in projects
such as systemDS mainly consisting of calls to the specific system-
under-test, about which a transferred model clearly cannot learn
any execution time properties.

Despite these results, we conclude that the models that achieve
the highest prediction performance are trained with data across
multiple projects, including ones with both complex and simpler
test cases. A more general model, i.e., a model that has been trained
using data of multiple projects (including the one that it is being

applied to) is able to outperform a "pure" model that is trained and
tested on a single, individual project.

4 DISCUSSION
Our study results show that the accurate prediction of execution
times of test suites is possible. This gives developers an early in-
dication of the time required to run the cases in the build process,
deciding in the process if techniques such as test case selection are
required.

4.1 Lessons Learned
FA-ASTs are a promising approach to represent source code
for performance prediction. Unlike previous work [21, 23, 35],
our goal in this study was to treat performance prediction as a
regression rather than a classification (slow or fast) problem. Our
results in Section 3.2 indicate that using flow augmentation we are
able to achieve good prediction quality. Furthermore, more infor-
mation could be added to the FA-AST, such as program dependency
graphs. We speculate that this approach is also promising to pre-
dict the performance of more complex, arbitrary code; however,
more specific experiments in this direction need to be carried out
as future research.

Figure 11: Testing trained models on unseen projects.

GraphConv substantially outperforms the more common
GGNN models in performance prediction as long as suffi-
cient data is available. As discussed in Section 3.2, our Graph-
Conv based GNN model substantially outperforms GGNN, which is
a currently commonly used graph neural network model in software
engineering research [1, 6]. However, this is only true if sufficient
data is available – when training models for individual projects, we
observed that, due to the limited amount of training data available
in these cases, the performance difference between our GraphConv
based model and the GGNN baseline was minimal. We conclude
that, as long as sufficient data is available, GraphConv should also
be investigated in other software engineering contexts that make
use of GNNs.

TEP-GNN in its current form is not able to generalize to
unseen projects. While TEP-GNN can effectively predict the ex-
ecution time of unseen test files, it can only do so if other test
cases from the same project have been used to build the model. This
implies that much of what the model learns about test case perfor-
mance during training is project-specific and does not generalize
to other projects. This is not surprising, given that the core of test
cases consist of invocations to the system-under-test, which will be
different from project to project. However, our results also demon-
strate that training a model on test cases originating from a range
of different projects leads to better predictions than training on a
single project. This indicates that some cross-project learning in-
deed happens. Evidently, for practitioners a general model that can
be applied to any project, without the need to train first based on
historical executions from the same project, would be much more
directly useful. Hence, future research should investigate whether
approaches such as meta-learning [31] could be used to build more
transferable models. At the very least, we hypothesize that general
prediction models for project families, such as Apache or Eclipse
projects, could be built.

4.2 Threats to Validity
Similar to other experimental studies in software engineering, our
work is subject to certain limitations and threats to validity, which
we elaborate in the following.

Internal Validity Threats. A key design choice in our study
was the usage of existing, real-world data from GitHub’s build
system, rather than collecting performance data ourselves (e.g., on
a dedicated experiment machine). This has obvious advantages with
regards to the realism of our approach, but raises the threat that our
training and test data may be subject to confounding factors outside
of our knowledge. In particular, prior research has shown that even
identically configured cloud virtual machines can vary significantly
in performance [15]. However, the high accuracy achieved by our
prediction models indicates that this is not a major concern with the
data we used. That said, we expect that TEP-GNN would perform
even better on the performance data that has been measured more
rigorously.

Another design choice was that we predict execution times for
entire test classes (files). More fine-grained predictions (e.g., for in-
dividual test cases in a class) would of course be doable, for instance
by constructing the FA-AST with test methods as entry points rather
than for an entire class as compilation unit. However, individual
test cases often have very short execution times in relation to the
precision with which build systems typically measure execution
times (milliseconds), and the resulting graphs would be very small.
We argue that our choice of test class granularity constitutes a good
trade-off that is still useful for developers.

External Validity Threats. An obvious question raised by our
work is how well the results reported in Section 3.2 would gen-
eralize to other projects. To mitigate this threat, we have chosen
four relatively different Java projects as study subjects following a
diversity sampling strategy [2]. However, our study does not allow
us to conclude whether the TEP-GNN approach would generalize
to other programming languages or closed-source software.

5 RELATED WORK
Predicting software performance. Predicting the absolute value
of a performance counter, such as execution time, based on the
source code alone is challenging, as application performance is a
function of several unknowns stemming from the application run-
time and interactions between the OS and underlying hardware.
This makes the problem notoriously challenging for any machine

learning model, including deep learning techniques. Hence, existing
studies often struggle with poor prediction accuracy [21, 23]. One
way to simplify the problem (and hence make it more tractable)
is to convert it into a classification problem. Examples of this ap-
proach include Zhou et al. [36], who predict if a program from a
programming competition website exceeds the time limit, Ramadan
et al. [24], who predict whether a performance change is intro-
duced by a code structure change, or Laaber et al. [13], who have
shown that a categorical classification of benchmarks into high- or
low-variability is feasible.

However, recent research has shown that predicting absolute
performance values can be feasible in more specialized contexts.
For example, Guo et al. successfully predict the execution time
of a specific untested configuration of a configurable system [7,
8], and Samoaa and Leitner have shown that the execution time
of a benchmark with a specific workload configuration can be
predicted [26]. In this work, our core contribution is we demonstrate
that predicting absolute performance values is possible in another
context, namely for the execution time of test files.

Graph neural networks for software engineering. Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs) constitute an up-and-coming machine
learning model in the context of software engineering research [27].
Graphs are mathematical structures used to model pairwise rela-
tions between objects. A graph can be used to model a wide number
of different domains, ranging from biology [10], face-to-face human
interactions [18, 19], or digital contact tracing [4]. Li et al [17] use a
GRU cell in gated graph neural networks (GGNNs) for updating the
nodes’ states. To evaluate their model they run the model on a basic
program and try to detect null pointers. Instead of having the whole
program as an input Li et al. [17] use the memory heap states of
the program to the model. Since the original work by Li et al. [17],
GGNNs have become a commonly used tool for applying GNNs
in software engineering. One challenge that needs to be solved
before any GNN approach can be applied for code-based software
engineering research is how to represent a program as graph.

Phan et al. [32] use graph convolutional networks (GCNs) based
on compiled assembly code to detect defects on control flow graphs
in C. Another application of control flow graphs is using graph
matching networks (GMN) between two graphs of binary func-
tions proposed by Li et al. [16]. Other researchers propose the cre-
ation of program graphs based on the AST. Allamanis et al. [1] and
Brockschmidt et al. [3] use GGNN in C# for naming variables and
generating program expressions for code completion respectively.

6 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Inn this work we presented TEP-GNN, an effective method for pre-
dicting the execution time of Java test files. Our approach leverages
explicitly capturing control and data flow information as augmenta-
tions to the program AST. Further, our approach applies high order
convolution graph neural networks over this flow-augmented AST
(FA-AST). By building FA-AST using original ASTs and flow edges,
our approach can directly capture the syntax and semantic structure
of test classes. Experimental results on four diverse test subjects
demonstrate that by combining graph neural networks and con-
trol/data flow information, we can predict absolute test execution
times with high accuracy.

As the future work, we plan to further extent the FA-AST model
currently used by TEP-GNN, as well as explore other ways of pro-
gram representation to capture more syntactic and semantic code
features. Additionally, we plan to apply our approach to the ex-
ecution time of general-purpose programs rather than test cases.
Finally, we would like to extend our current labeled data set by
applying active learning to increase the amount of training data in
a systematic way.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work received financial support from the Swedish Research
Council VR under grant number 2018-04127 (Developer-Targeted
Performance Engineering for Immersed Release and Software Engi-
neering).

REFERENCES
[1] M. Allamanis, M. Brockschmidt, and M. Khademi. Learning to represent programs

with graphs, 2017.

[2] S. Baltes and P. Ralph. Sampling in software engineering research: a critical

review and guidelines. Empirical Software Engineering, 94(27).

[3] M. Brockschmidt, M. Allamanis, A. L. Gaunt, and O. Polozov. Generative code

modeling with graphs, 2018.

[4] G. Cencetti, G. Santin, A. Longa, E. Pigani, A. Barrat, C. Cattuto, S. Lehmann,
M. Salathe, and B. Lepri. Digital proximity tracing on empirical contact networks
for pandemic control. Nature communications, 12(1):1–12, 2021.

[5] F. G. de Oliveira Neto, A. Ahmad, O. Leifler, K. Sandahl, and E. Enoiu. Improving
continuous integration with similarity-based test case selection. In Proceedings
of the 13th International Workshop on Automation of Software Test, pages 39–45,
2018.

[6] P. Fernandes, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt. Structured neural summariza-

tion, 2018.

[7] J. Guo, K. Czarnecki, S. Apel, N. Siegmund, and A. Wąsowski. Variability-aware
performance prediction: A statistical learning approach. In 2013 28th IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE), pages 301–311,
2013.

[8] J. Guo, D. Yang, N. Siegmund, S. Apel, A. Sarkar, P. Valov, K. Czarnecki, A. Wa-
sowski, and H. Yu. Data-efficient performance learning for configurable systems.
Empirical Software Engineering, 23(3):1826–1867, jun 2018.

[9] HP.Samoaa, A.Longa, M.Mohamed, MH.Chehreghani, and P.Leitner. TEP-GNN:
Accurate Execution Time Prediction of Functional Tests using Graph Neural Net-
works. Zenodo, Aug. 2022. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7003881.

[10] W. Huber, V. J. Carey, L. Long, S. Falcon, and R. Gentleman. Graphs in molecular

biology. BMC bioinformatics, 8(6):1–14, 2007.

[11] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization, 2014.
[12] E. Knauss, M. Staron, W. Meding, O. Söder, A. Nilsson, and M. Castell. Supporting
continuous integration by code-churn based test selection. In 2015 IEEE/ACM 2nd
International Workshop on Rapid Continuous Software Engineering, pages 19–25.
IEEE, 2015.

[13] C. Laaber, M. Basmaci, and P. Salza. Predicting unstable software benchmarks
using static source code features. Empirical Software Engineering, 26(6), nov 2021.
[14] C. Laaber, J. Scheuner, and P. Leitner. Software Microbenchmarking in the Cloud.
How Bad is it Really? Empirical Software Engineering, 24(4):2469–2508, 2019.
[15] P. Leitner and J. Cito. Patterns in the chaos - a study of performance variation
and predictability in public iaas clouds. ACM Transactions on Internet Technology,
16(3):15:1–15:23, apr 2016.

[16] Y. Li, C. Gu, T. Dullien, O. Vinyals, and P. Kohli. Graph matching networks
for learning the similarity of graph structured objects.
In K. Chaudhuri and
R. Salakhutdinov, editors, Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on
Machine Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages
3835–3845. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019.

[17] Y. Li, D. Tarlow, M. Brockschmidt, and R. Zemel. Gated graph sequence neural

networks, 2015.

[18] A. Longa, G. Cencetti, S. Lehmann, A. Passerini, and B. Lepri. Neighbour-
hood matching creates realistic surrogate temporal networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2205.08820, 2022.

[19] A. Longa, G. Cencetti, B. Lepri, and A. Passerini. An efficient procedure for mining
egocentric temporal motifs. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 36(1):355–378,
2022.

[20] D. Marijan, A. Gotlieb, and M. Liaaen. A learning algorithm for optimizing
continuous integration development and testing practice. Software: Practice and
Experience, 49(2):192–213, 2019.

[21] K. Meng and B. Norris. Mira: A framework for static performance analysis.
In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Cluster Computing (CLUSTER), pages
103–113, 2017.

[22] C. Morris, M. Ritzert, M. Fey, W. L. Hamilton, J. E. Lenssen, G. Rattan, and
M. Grohe. Weisfeiler and leman go neural: Higher-order graph neural networks.
In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 33, pages
4602–4609, 2019.

[23] S. H. K. Narayanan, B. Norris, and P. D. Hovland. Generating performance bounds
from source code. In 2010 39th International Conference on Parallel Processing
Workshops, pages 197–206, 2010.

[24] T. Ramadan, T. Z. Islam, C. Phelps, N. Pinnow, and J. J. Thiagarajan. Comparative
code structure analysis using deep learning for performance prediction. In 2021
IEEE International Symposium on Performance Analysis of Systems and Software
(ISPASS), pages 151–161, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, mar 2021. IEEE Computer
Society.

[25] H. Samoaa and B. Catania. A pipeline for measuring brand loyalty through social
media mining. In SOFSEM 2021: Theory and Practice of Computer Science, pages
489–504, Cham, 2021. Springer International Publishing.

[26] H. Samoaa and P. Leitner. An exploratory study of the impact of parameterization
on jmh measurement results in open-source projects.
In Proceedings of the
ACM/SPEC International Conference on Performance Engineering, ICPE ’21, page
213–224, New York, NY, USA, 2021. Association for Computing Machinery.
[27] H. P. Samoaa, F. Bayram, P. Salza, and P. Leitner. A systematic mapping study
of source code representation for deep learning in software engineering. IET
Software.

[28] J. P. Sandoval Alcocer, A. Bergel, and M. T. Valente. Learning from source code
history to identify performance failures. In Proceedings of the 7th ACM/SPEC on

International Conference on Performance Engineering, ICPE ’16, page 37–48, New
York, NY, USA, 2016. Association for Computing Machinery.

[29] H. Schulz, D. Okanović, A. van Hoorn, and P. Tůma. Context-tailored workload
model generation for continuous representative load testing. In Proceedings of
the ACM/SPEC International Conference on Performance Engineering, ICPE ’21,
page 21–32, New York, NY, USA, 2021. Association for Computing Machinery.
[30] H. Spieker, A. Gotlieb, D. Marijan, and M. Mossige. Reinforcement learning for
automatic test case prioritization and selection in continuous integration. In
ISSTA, pages 12–22, 2017.

[31] J. Vanschoren. Meta-learning: A survey.
[32] A. Viet Phan, M. Le Nguyen, and L. Thu Bui. Convolutional neural networks over
control flow graphs for software defect prediction. In 2017 IEEE 29th International
Conference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence (ICTAI), pages 45–52, 2017.
[33] W. Wang, G. Li, B. Ma, X. Xia, and Z. Jin. Detecting code clones with graph neural
network and flow-augmented abstract syntax tree. In 2020 IEEE 27th International
Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering (SANER), pages
261–271, 2020.

[34] B. Weisfeiler and A. Leman. The reduction of a graph to canonical form and the

algebra which appears therein. NTI, Series, 2(9):12–16, 1968.

[35] M. Zhou, J. Chen, H. Hu, J. Yu, Z. Li, and H. Hu. Deeptle: Learning code-level
features to predict code performance before it runs. In 2019 26th Asia-Pacific
Software Engineering Conference (APSEC), pages 252–259, 2019.

[36] M. Zhou, J. Chen, H. Hu, J. Yu, Z. Li, and H. Hu. Deeptle: Learning code-level
features to predict code performance before it runs. In 2019 26th Asia-Pacific
Software Engineering Conference (APSEC), pages 252–259, 2019.

