Development of a CAV-based Intersection Control System and Corridor Level Impact 
Assessment 

Ardeshir Mirbakhsh 
Department of Transportation Engineering 
New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, New Jersey, 07102 
Email: am2775@njit.edu 

Joyoung Lee 
Department of Transportation Engineering 
New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, New Jersey, 07102 
Email: jo.y.lee@njit.edu 

Dejan Besenski 
Department of Transportation Engineering 
New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, New Jersey, 07102 
Email: besenski@njit.edu 

Word Count: 6707 words + 2 table (250 words per table) = 7,207 words 

Submitted 07/30/2022 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ardeshir Mirbakhsh, Joyoung Lee, and Dejan Besenski 

ABSTRACT 
This paper presents a signal-free intersection control system for CAVs by combination of a pixel reservation 
algorithm and a Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) decision-making logic, followed by a corridor-level 
impact  assessment  of  the  proposed  model.  The  pixel  reservation  algorithm  detects  potential  colliding 
maneuvers and the DRL logic optimizes vehicles' movements to avoid collision and minimize the overall 
delay at the intersection. The proposed control system is called Decentralized Sparse Coordination System 
(DSCLS) since each vehicle has its own control logic and interacts with other vehicles in coordinated states 
only. Due to the chain impact of taking random actions in the DRL's training course, the trained model can 
deal with unprecedented volume conditions, which poses the main challenge in intersection management. 
The performance of the developed model is compared with conventional and CAV-based control systems, 
including  fixed traffic lights,  actuated traffic lights,  and  the  Longest  Queue  First  (LQF)  control system 
under three volume regimes in a corridor of four intersections in VISSIM software. The simulation result 
revealed that the proposed model reduces delay by 50%, 29%, and 23% in moderate, high, and extreme 
volume  regimes  compared  to  the  other  CAV-based  control  system.  Improvements  in  travel  time,  fuel 
consumption, emission, and Surrogate Safety Measures (SSM) are also noticeable. 
Keywords:  Connected  and  Autonomous  Vehicles,  Signal-Free  Intersection  Control  Systems,  Deep 
Reinforcement Learning, Machine Learning, Pixel Reservation Control System 

2 

 
 
 
 
Ardeshir Mirbakhsh, Joyoung Lee, and Dejan Besenski 

INTRODUCTION 
Due to rapid population growth and the increased number of vehicles, traffic congestion, collisions, and 
pollution have become leading causes of decreased living standards. In only 2017 and the USA, traffic 
congestion has caused 8.8 billion hours of delay and 3.3 billion gallons of fuel waste, resulting in a total 
cost  of  179  billion  USD.  Several  studies  prove  that  human  errors  are  pivotal  in  traffic  congestion  and 
accidents, and driver error contributes to up to 75% of roadway crashes worldwide. Intersections are crucial 
in traffic delays and collisions among urban traffic facilities. In the United States, 44% of reported traffic 
accidents occur at urban intersections, leading to 8,500 fatalities and around 1 million injuries annually (3). 
Taking advantage of the communication capability of Connected and Autonomous Vehicles (CAV) to 
improve traffic measures and safety at intersections is attracting noticeable attention from the transportation 
research  world.  Several  approaches,  such  as  online  optimization,  trajectory  planning,  and  rule-based 
intersection  control  logic  for  CAVs,  have  been  around  for  the  last  couple  of  decades.  Although  a 
comprehensive  literature  review  study  on  CAV-based  intersection  management  systems  shows  that 
Machine Learning (ML)-based approaches are more promising than other methodologies, less than 4% of 
the proposed systems from 2008 to 2019 are ML-based (2). And most of them have used ML to optimize 
traffic lights' phasing and timing in an isolated or grouped setting. 

Among ML techniques, Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) is the closest to the human brain's learning 
system,  outperforming  humans  in  solving  complicated  decision-making  problems,  such  as  strategic 
multiplayer video games. Therefore it appears to be a well-fitting solution to tackle stochastics in CAV's 
control at intersections (4) (5). Few pieces of literature exist about DRL-based intersection control systems, 
and no DRL-based intersection control has been developed to control individual vehicles' movement in 
roadway circumstances.  

In  this  study,  a  Decentralized  Sparse  Coordination  Learning  System  (DSCLS)  controls  CAVs  at 
intersections.  Each  vehicle  approaching  the  intersection  is  a  separate  agent  and  coordinates  with  other 
agents  only  if  required.  The  intersection  is  divided  into  grid  areas  (known  as cells),  each  agent  tries  to 
reserve its desired cells ahead of time to detect potential colliding movements. A DRL coordination logic 
will control the vehicles to avoid collisions and minimize overall delay at the intersection. The DSCLS is 
developed  as  a  Python  application  controlling  individual  vehicles  in  VISSIM  software  through  the 
Component Object Model (COM) interface. Performance of the proposed model is compared with other 
conventional and CAV-based intersection control systems in a VISSIM test bed.  

CAV-BASED INTERSECTION CONTROL SYSTEMS 

Based on the existing literature, CAV-based intersection control systems are clustered into four main 
groups, including 1) rule-based, 2) online optimization-based, 3) trajectory planning-based, and 4) ML-
based algorithms.  

Rule-based Intersection Control Systems for CAVs 

Most rule-based intersection logics are based on the intersection space reservation approach. The space 
reservation  approach  was  initially  developed  in  2004  by  Dresner  et  al.  (6).  This  method  divides  the 
intersection area into an n×n grid of reservation tiles. Each approaching vehicle to the intersection attempts 
to reserve a time-space block at the intersection area by transmitting a reservation request to the intersection 
manager, including its information such as speed and location. According to intersection control policy, the 
intersection manager decides whether to approve and provide more passing restrictions to the vehicle or 
reject the reservation request. Dresner et al. deployed a "First Come First Serve" (FCFS) control policy, in 
which the passing priority is assigned to the vehicle with the earliest arrival time. All other vehicles must 
yield to the vehicle with priority. In  a following study, Dresner et al. (7) added several complementary 
regulations to FCFC policy to make it work more reliable, safe, and efficient. Simulation results revealed 

3 

 
 
 
 
Ardeshir Mirbakhsh, Joyoung Lee, and Dejan Besenski 

that  FCFS  policy  noticeably  reduces  intersection  delay  compared  to  traffic  light  and  stop  sign  control 
systems. 

Zhang et al. (8) proposed a state-action control logic based on Prior First in First Out (PriorFIFO) logic. 
They  assumed  spatial-temporal  and  kinetic  parameters  for  vehicle  movement  based  on  a  centralized 
scheduling mechanism.  This  study  aimed  to  reduce  control  delay  for vehicles  with higher  priority.  The 
simulation results with a combination of high, average, and low priority vehicles showed that the algorithm 
works well for vehicles with higher priority. Meanwhile, causing some extra delays for regular vehicles 
with lower priority.  

Carlino  et  al.  (9)  developed  an  auction-based  intersection  control  logic  based  on  Clarke  Groves  tax 
mechanism and pixel reservation. In this approach, if commonly reserved tiles exist between vehicles, an 
auction  is  held  between the  involved  vehicles.  All  vehicles  in  each  direction contribute to  their leading 
vehicle to win the auction, and the control logic decides which leading vehicles receive a pass order first. 
The bid's winner and its contributors (followers) have to pay the runner-up bid amount with a proportional 
payment (based on their contribution value in the bid). A "system wallet" component was added to auction-
based intersection control to ensure low-budget vehicles or emergency vehicles would not be over-delayed. 
A comparison of simulation results showed that the auction-based control logic outperforms the FIFO logic. 

Online Optimization Intersection Control logic for CAVs 

Yan  et  al.  (10)  proposed  a  dynamic  programming-based  optimization  system  to  find  optimal  vehicle 
passing sequence and minimize intersection evacuation time. In this algorithm, the optimizer agent clusters 
vehicles into several groups so that each group of vehicles can pass the intersection simultaneously without 
a potential collision. Since vehicles were clustered into several groups, the conventional problem of finding 
an optimal passing order of vehicles was transformed into partitioning the vehicles into different groups 
and finding optimal group sequences to minimize the vehicle evacuation time. In this method, approaching 
vehicles at the intersection provide their data to the controller agent. And the controller agent has to run the 
dynamic programming optimization whenever a new vehicle is detected. However, if a group of vehicles 
is  authorized to  pass the intersection,  the  calculation  process is  delayed till the  whole  group  passes the 
intersection.  

Wu et al. (11) deployed a timed Petri Net model to control a simple intersection with two conflicting 
movements. The intersection control was considered a distributed system, with parameters such as vehicles' 
crossing  time  and  time-space  between  successive  vehicles.  Two  control  logics,  including  1)  central 
controller  and  2)  car-to-car  communication,  were  developed  and  tested.  In  central  controller  logic, 
approaching  vehicles  to  the  intersection  provides  their  information  to  the  controller  center,  and  the 
controller center has to provide optimized passing order for the vehicles. While in car-to-car control logic, 
each leading vehicle collects its followers' data, and if the distance between them is shorter than a threshold, 
they would be considered a group. In the latter system, only leading vehicles of groups communicate with 
each  other,  and  the  passing  order  priority  for  each  group  is  defined  by  its  leader's  proximity  to  the 
intersection. The optimization task was decomposed into chained sub-problems by a backtracking process, 
and  the  final  optimal  solution  was  found  by  solving  single  problems  and  applying  forward  dynamic 
programming  to  find  the  shortest  path  from  the  original  problem  to  the  last  problem  in  the  graph.  The 
simulation results revealed that both control logics have the same performance in delay reduction, resulting 
in almost the same queue length.   

Fayazi  et  al.  (12)  deployed  Mixed-Integer  Linear  Programming  (MILP)  approach  to  optimize  CAVs' 
arrival time at the intersection. In this approach, the intersection controller receives arrival and departure 
times from approaching vehicles and optimizes the vehicles' arrival times. The optimization goal was to 
minimize  the  difference  between  the  current  time  and  the  last  vehicle's  expected  arrival  time  at  the 
intersection. To ensure all vehicles are not forced to travel near the speed limit, a cost value was defined as 

4 

 
 
 
Ardeshir Mirbakhsh, Joyoung Lee, and Dejan Besenski 

a  function  of  the  difference  between  the  assigned  and  desired  crossing  time  for  each  vehicle.  Several 
constraints,  such  as  speed  limit,  maximum  acceleration,  minimum  headway,  and  minimum  cushion  for 
conflicting movements, were applied to the model. A two-movement intersection simulation results showed 
that the MILP-based controller reduces average travel time by 70.5% and average stop delay by 52.4%. It 
was also proved that the control logic would encourage platooning under a specific gap setting.  

Lee et al. (13) proposed a Cumulative Travel-time Responsive (CTR) intersection control algorithm under 
CAVs' imperfect market penetration rate. They considered the elapsed time spent by vehicles from when 
they entered the network to the current position as a real-time measure of travel time. Kalman filtering 
approach was deployed to cover the imperfect market penetration rate of CAVs for travel time estimation. 
Simulations were run in VISSIM for an isolated intersection with 40 volume scenarios covering the volume 
capacity  ratio  ranging  from  0.3  to  1.1  and  different  CAV  market  penetration  rates.  Simulation  results 
showed  that  the  CTR  algorithm  improves  mobility  measures  such  as  travel  time,  average  speed,  and 
throughput by 34%, 36%, and 4%, compared to the actuated control system. The CO2 emission and fuel 
consumption were also reduced by 13% and 10%. It was also revealed that the CTR would produce more 
significant benefits as the market penetration rate passes the threshold of 30%. In general, more benefits 
were observed as the total intersection volume increased.  

 Trajectory Planning Intersection Control Logics for CAVs 

Lee et al. (14) proposed a trajectory planning-based intersection control logic named Cooperative Vehicle 
Intersection  Control  (CVIC).  The  control  algorithm  provided  a  location-time  diagram  (trajectory)  of 
individual  vehicles  and  minimized  the  length  of  overlapped  trajectories  (conflicting  vehicles).  The 
optimization task was modeled as a Nonlinear Constrained Programming (NCP) problem. To ensure an 
optimal solution is achieved, three analytical optimization approaches, including the Active Set Method 
(ASM), Interior Point Method (IPM), and Genetic Algorithm (GA), were deployed. All three algorithms 
were  implemented  in  parallel,  and  the  first  acceptable  solution  was  implemented.  Minimum/Maximum 
acceleration, speed, and safe headway were considered optimization problem's constraints. A simulation 
testbed  was  developed  in  VISSIM  to  compare  the  proposed  algorithm's  efficiency  with  actuated  traffic 
signals  under  different  volume  conditions.  The  simulation  results  revealed  that  the  proposed  algorithm 
improves stopped delay, travel time, and total throughput by 99%, 33%, and 8%. A 44% reduction in CO2 
emission and fuel consumption was also achieved. It was also revealed that the CVIC is more advantageous 
when the intersection operates under oversaturated conditions.  

Based on the assumption that vehicle trajectories can be defined as cubic interpolated splines, having the 
flexibility to reflect delays from the given signal timing, Gutesta et al. (15) developed a trajectory-driven 
intersection control for the CAVs. Vehicle trajectories were developed for several vehicles passing multiple 
intersections. The optimization goal was to minimize the sum of all trajectory curves (which reflect control 
delays) conditioned to meeting safety constraints. Traffic constraints such as speed limits were reflected in 
the  model  by  adjusting  the  trajectory  slopes.  A  Genetic  Algorithm  (GA)  was  deployed  to  evaluate  all 
possible combinations of optimized single-vehicle trajectories. In addition, an Artificial Neural Network 
(ANN),  trained  with  available  traffic  stream  factors,  was  deployed  to  achieve  short-term  prediction  of 
vehicle  delays  to  be  integrated  with  the  optimization  model.  The  simulation  results  revealed  that  the 
proposed control algorithm improves traffic measures under stable and unstable traffic conditions, even 
with CAVs' low market penetration rate.   

Krajewski  et  al.  (16)  proposed  a  decoupled  cooperative  trajectory  optimization  logic  to  optimize  and 
coordinate CAVs trajectories at signalized intersections. The optimization goal was to minimize delay by 
coordinating conflicting movements such as straight going and left turns. The state-space of each vehicle 
had three dimensions: position, speed, and time. The optimization task was transformed into a graph (nodes 
representing the states and edges representing possible transitions between pairs of states) with a combined 

5 

 
 
 
Ardeshir Mirbakhsh, Joyoung Lee, and Dejan Besenski 

cost function of delay and comfort. The "decoupled" term refers to splitting the optimization problem into 
two stacked layers, 1) Trajectory Layer (TL) and 2) Negotiation Layer (NL). The TL layer's task was to 
calculate trajectories for individual vehicles, and the NL layer's task was to coordinate all trajectories to 
prevent  potential  collisions.  The  latter  task  was  achieved  by  setting  constraints  for  each  vehicle's  TL 
algorithm, and the cost function was a weighted sum of the individual cost functions. The weight could also 
prioritize specific vehicle types. Simulation results revealed that the proposed algorithm reduces the cost 
value by 28% compared to the intelligent driver model replicating human-driven vehicles.  

Machine Learning-Based Intersection Control Logics for CAVs 

Recent  access  to  abundant  and  cheap  computation  and  storage  resources  has  made  ML  approaches 
popular in solving stochastic problems in different fields. Over the last few years, some researchers have 
deployed ML techniques to optimize single/multi-intersection traffic signal controls or develop signal-free 
control logic for CAVs. A selection of ML-based interaction control systems is reviewed in this section.    
Lamouik et al. (18) developed a multiagent control system based on Deep Reinforcement Learning to 
coordinate  CAVs  at  the  intersection.  Each  vehicle  transfers  five  features  to  the  controller  agent  in  this 
method,  including  position,  speed,  dimension,  destination,  and  priority.  The  controller  agent  has  three 
possible  responses  for  each  vehicle, including acceleration,  deceleration,  and  keep-same-speed.  Reward 
value is a function of speed, priority, and collision. The controller agent was expected to avoid collisions 
and prioritize vehicles with higher priority or higher speed in the training process. The controller agent was 
trained after several training epochs. However, the simulations were not run in a traffic network setting, 
and no traffic measures were assessed in this study.  

Tong Wu et al. (19) developed a multiagent deep reinforcement learning algorithm to optimize several 
traffic lights in a corridor. Each traffic light was considered an agent, with actions being green lights for 
different phases. The reward value was set as a function of real-time delay for each vehicle, weighted by 
its priority. The innovation in this study was information exchange between controller agents so that each 
agent could estimate the policy of the other agents. According to other agents' estimated policy, each agent 
could adjust the local policy to achieve the optimal global policy. Two networks with different intersections 
numbers were developed in SUMO for assessment purposes. Simulation results revealed that the proposed 
model outperforms independent deep Q-learning (no exchange of information between agents) and deep 
deterministic policy gradient (single-agent controlling all intersections). It was also shown that the model 
outperforms self-organizing and fixed-time traffic lights.  

Touhbi et al. (20) developed a Reinforcement Learning (RL)-based adaptive traffic control system. The 
main goal was to find the impact of using different reward functions, including queue length, cumulative 
delay, and throughput, on intersection performance. Unlike previous studies, which considered queue or 
delay as states, in this study, the state value was defined as a maximum residual queue (queue length divided 
by lane length) to reflect the traffic load on each phase. The learning process for a four-way single-lane 
intersection took 100 epochs of 1hr simulation runs, and the simulation results revealed that the proposed 
algorithm remarkably outperforms the pre-timed traffic signals. The analysis of different reward function 
deployments showed that each function's efficiency highly depends on the traffic volume.  

Yuanyuan Wu et al. (21) developed a decentralized coordination algorithm for CAVs' management at the 
intersection.  Each vehicle was  considered  an  agent,  and  each  agent's  state included  its lane,  speed, and 
moving intention. The intersection area was divided into n×n grid, and each vehicle was supposed to reserve 
its desired pixel ahead of time. Vehicles could enter either a coordinated or an independent state, based on 
having a reserved pixel in common or not. A Conventional multiagent Q-learning was deployed in this 
study, meaning that new states and their Q-values were added to a matrix as they came up, and the controller 
agent  had  to  refer  to  a  specific  cell  in  the  matrix  to  make  a  decision.  Aligned  with  the  multiagent 
optimization goal, each agent's effort to maximize its Q-value resulted in a maximized global reward for all 

6 

 
 
 
Ardeshir Mirbakhsh, Joyoung Lee, and Dejan Besenski 

agents. Simulation results revealed that the proposed model outperforms FCFS, fixed time traffic light, and 
LQF control system in delay reduction.  

METHODOLOGY  

Reinforcement Learning and Markov Decision Process 

RL  problems  in  which  an agent  learns  to  solve a  problem  are  a subfield  of  artificial  intelligence and 
Markov Decision Processes (MDPs), first proposed in the 1950s (4). The process can be expressed as an 
agent taking actions; the environment responding to the agent by presenting new state and reward based on 
the  last  act's  quality.  The  agent  seeks  to  maximize  the  reward  over  a  series  of  interactions  with  the 
environment in discrete time steps (t). The MDP framework appears in Figure 1. 

Figure 1 The agent-environment interactions in the MDP (4) 

The main idea of RL is to run an experiment several times (known as an epoch or episode) to train an 
agent to take the best actions. The training course consists of running several iterations of the experiment 
until the cumulative reward for each epoch converges to a maximum value. Each epoch ends with losing 
or winning an Atari game player agent. However, for the experiment with nonbinary outcomes, such as 
automated intersection control systems, each epoch could be running the experiment for a fixed period. 

Deep Reinforcement Learning and Deep Q-Networks 

In conventional RL, the return values for possible actions in each state are saved in a multi-dimensional 
matrix.  However,  this  approach  is  not  practical  in  complex  environments  since  a  significant  space  is 
required to save all state-action combinations. Moreover, the agent will never know how to deal with an 
unprecedented state.  

Meanwhile,  in  DRL,  the  look-up  tables  are  substituted  with  neural  networks,  eliminating  the 
shortcomings  of  conventional  RL.  Several  methods,  including  Reinforce,  State-Action-Reward-State-
Action (SARSA), and Deep Q-Network (DQN), are proposed to perform the DRL process. In this study, 
DQN is used, which was initially proposed by Mnih et al. (22). The DQN estimates every action's expected 
return  using  Temporal  Difference  learning.  DQN  formulation  for  estimating  return  values,  called  Q-
function, is presented in Equation (1).  

Q(s, a) = r +  ϒ max Q(s,, a,) 

(1) 

Where:  

-  𝑄(𝑠, 𝑎) or Q-value defines the value of the current state-action pair.  
-  𝑄(𝑠,, 𝑎,) defines the value of the next state-action pair. 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ardeshir Mirbakhsh, Joyoung Lee, and Dejan Besenski 

-  ϒ or "discount rate" ranges from zero to one and defines the present value of future rewards. If ϒ =
0, the agent is myopic, only concerned with maximizing the immediate reward. As ϒ approaches 
one, the agent cares more about future rewards and becomes more farsighted. 
𝑟 is the immediate reward for the current actions.  

- 

AI training and trial and error processes are usually performed in simulation testbeds, enabling a trained 
agent to tackle a broad scope of real-world scenarios. In the DQN approach, states are the input layer of the 
neural network, and the neural network's output layer is an estimation of Q-values for all possible actions 
in the current state. The training occurs by updating the neural network weights based on a batch of recent 
historical data ((states, actions), Q-values). DQN is an off-policy algorithm, meaning no policy is used to 
generate training data for DQN, and the algorithm learns from all experiences gathered by an agent. In this 
study, the simulation test bed is developed in VISSIM software, and the DQN is developed as a Python 
application; a high-level training process of a DQN agent appears in Figure 2.  

Figure 2 DQN agent training process 

Multiagent Deep Queue Networks  

Since this study considers each approaching vehicle to the intersection a separate agent, a proper DQN 
method  capable  of  managing  several  agents  must  be  deployed.  The  Multi-agent  Deep  Queue  Network 
(MDQN)  is  designed  to  deal  with  sparse  coordination  settings  in  which  an  agent  could  be  either  in  an 
independent or coordinated state. Being in an independent state does not require interactions with other 
agents, and the agent receives an individual reward (Equation (2)). Meanwhile, a coordinated state requires 
interaction with other agents, and the agent earns a joint reward (Equation (3)). The optimization goal is to 
maximize the total distributed reward at each step, known as the global reward (Equation (4)).  

R(sI , ai ) = ri  

h

r(sj, aj) = ∑ rjb

b=1

N
R(S, A) = ∑ r(i or j) b
b=1

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

Where: 

-  Subscripts 𝑖 refer to an agent being in an independent state,  
-  Subscripts 𝑗 refer to an agent being in a joint state,  
-  ℎ is the number of agents involved in a joint state, 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ardeshir Mirbakhsh, Joyoung Lee, and Dejan Besenski 

-  N is the total number of agents in an environment,  
-  R is the global reward. 

Referring to RL's nature, which considers future states and rewards while updating the current state's Q-
value, a transition from an independent state to a coordinated state or vice versa requires specific settings 
for updating Q-value in MADQN. Three possible transition types appear in Figure 3. 

Figure 3 Possible transition types in MADQN (24) 

Kok et al. (24) proposed formulations for updating Q-values for possible transition types in a conventional 
Q-learning approach. However, this study must adjust the formulas to be compatible with deep Q-learning. 
The adjustment includes removing the learning rate factor from the Q-values formulas since the learning 
rate  is  already  included  in  neural  network  settings.  The  adjusted  updating  Q-values  formulas  for  three 
possible types of transitions appear in the following. 

Type  1:  when  an  agent  moves  from  a  coordinated  state  to  another  coordinated  state  or  from  an 

independent state to another independent state, the coordinated or independent Q-value is updated by: 

Q(s, a)i or j = r(s, a)i or j +  ϒ max Q(s,, a,)i or j 

(5) 

Type  2:  when  an  agent  moves  from  a  coordinated  state  to  an  independent  state,  the  joint  Q-value  is 

updated by: 

h

(6) 

Q(s, a)j = ∑[r(s, a)j +  ϒ max Q(s,, a,)i]

j

Type 3: when an agent moves from an independent state to a coordinated state, the independent Q-values 

is updated by: 

Q(s, a)i = [r(s, a)i  +  ϒ

1
h

max Q(s,, a,)i ] 

(7) 

Based on the existing literature (7) (6), the pixel reservation system guarantees a collision-free vehicle 
maneuver  system  by  itself.  Therefore,  unlike  most  other  RL-based  AV  management  systems,  collision 
avoidance is not considered in the reward function as an optimization goal. 

EXPERIMENT DEVELOPMENT 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ardeshir Mirbakhsh, Joyoung Lee, and Dejan Besenski 

Environment Design, States, and Reward Function  

The environment is a 4-way intersection including three lanes at each approach with dedicated left and 
right turn lanes. Traffic volume production, roadway configurations, and vehicles are set up in VISSIM 
software.  The  DSCLS  application is developed in  Python  and  coupled  with  VISSIM  through  the  COM 
interface. The intersection area is divided into 2.5 × 2.5 m grid tiles, known as pixels or cells. The pixel 
reservation approach was initially proposed by Dresner et al. (6), and several researchers have used this 
method to manage CAVs at the intersection. This paper is inspired by a more recent pixel reservation-based 
study by Wu et al. (21). 

 The maximum speed is 40.2 km/hr, and the simulation resolution is set to 1 sec/step, meaning that each 
vehicle  would  be  surveying  a  maximum  length  of  11.17  meters  at  each  step  (𝑉∆𝑡 = 11.7 × 1=11.17). 
Therefore,  the  grid  zones  are  extended  to  11.17  meters  (5  cells)  upstream  of  the  intersection  for  each 
approaching section. The proposed algorithm takes control of the vehicles as soon as they enter the gridded 
area. Assuming a vehicle length of 4.90 meters (Ford Fusion 2019), each vehicle would occupy either two 
or three cells at each time step. The environment's physical settings and definition of current cells, desired 
cells,  and  commonly  desired  cells  appear  in  Figure  4.  The  maximum  value  between  survey  and  stop 
distances defines the number of desired cells for each vehicle. The survey distance includes the number of 
desired cells if the vehicle accelerates or keeps moving at the maximum speed. The stop distance covers 
the required cells for the vehicle to stop. Since, while reserving cells, it is unknown whether the vehicle 
would be commanded to accelerate or decelerate for the next step, it is required to reserve enough cells to 
cover both scenarios. 

Figure 4 The intersection environment physical settings 

Based on classical physics theory,  the survey distance equals (𝑉∆𝑡 +  

𝑎∆𝑡2 ) if the vehicle is moving 
slower than the maximum speed and can still accelerate, or it equals (𝑉∆𝑡) if the vehicle is already moving 

1
2

with the maximum speed, and the stop distance equals (
to 3.5 and 7 𝑚/𝑠𝑒𝑐2. The stop and survey distance formulas are shown in Equation (8). 

). The acceleration and deceleration rates are set 

𝑉2
2𝑎

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ardeshir Mirbakhsh, Joyoung Lee, and Dejan Besenski 

  max ([

DS =  

{

max ([

V2
2a
V2
2a

] , [V∆t +  

1
2

a∆t2])    V < Vm

(8) 

] , [V∆t])                      V = Vm

Where: 

-  ∆𝑡: each step's time length 
-  V: current speed 
-  𝑎: acceleration or deceleration capability  
-  DS: Number of desired cells 

If  the  algorithm  detects  a  shared  desired  cell  between  vehicles,  they  will  enter  a  coordinated  state; 
otherwise,  they  will  be  in  an  independent  state.  For  example,  vehicles  2  and  3  in  Figure  4  are  in  a 
coordinated state since they have reserved common cells. Each leading vehicle's state includes its current 
speed, current cell, and the queue length behind it. Possible actions for each vehicle to avoid collision are 
acceleration, deceleration, or maintaining the current speed. Equations (9) and Equation (10) present the 
state and possible actions.  

𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑖 = (𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑒𝑑𝑖 , 𝐶𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝐶𝑒𝑙𝑙𝑖, 𝑄𝑢𝑒𝑢𝑒𝑖) 

𝐴𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑖 = (−𝑎𝑐𝑐, +𝑎𝑐𝑐, 𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑛 𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑒𝑑) 

(9) 

(10) 

Each  leading  vehicle's  reward  at  each  time  step  is  the  summation  of  the  delay  of  all  vehicles  in  its 
direction. Assuming that the distance traveled by the vehicle V𝑖 at the time step t is L𝑖, then the optimal time 
). Each approach's delay value equals the reward function and is 
required to pass the distance equals( 

L𝑖
V𝑚

calculated based on Equation (11).  

n

r(t) =   − ∑(∆t −  

i=1

Li
Vm

] 
)

(11) 

The RL's goal is to optimize the total return (reward) at the end of each episode and not the immediate 
reward.  Therefore,  being  independent in  this  environment  does  not  necessarily result in  acceleration  or 
maintaining the maximum speed.  

Training Settings and Learning Performance  

For training purposes, traffic volume is set to 2,500 and 1,500 Veh/hr on major and minor streets. Vehicles 
are  stochastically  generated  with  a  constant  random  seed  by  VISSIM  software  for  900  seconds.  Initial 
Epsilon (ε) value is set to 1, which may cause long queues. Therefore, intersection legs are extended 2 km 
in each direction to reflect the potential queue length. The total epoch length is set to 1500 seconds to ensure 
that all generated vehicles have evacuated the intersection at the end of each epoch.  

The simulation resolution is set to 1 step/sec, and the random seed is kept constant during all training 
iterations. As mentioned in the methodology section, to improve the DQN performance, a lagged copy of 
the neural network estimates the target Q-values. The target neural network parameters are updated every 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ardeshir Mirbakhsh, Joyoung Lee, and Dejan Besenski 

five epochs (target network update frequency). The replay memory size, which defines how many of the 
latest experiences will be stored in the memory for training purpose, is set to 10,000. The minibatch size, 
which defines the size of random data set from replay memory to be forwarded to the neural network, is set 
to 32. The training process hyperparameter settings appear in TABLE 1. 

TABLE 1 Training Process Hyperparameters Setting 

Hyperparameter  
Number of steps per epoch 
Step size (Δt), equal to simulation resolution  
Replay memory size  
Mini-batch size  
Target network update frequency  
Initial ε 
ε-decay factor  
Discount (γ) 

Value 
1,500 
1 sec 
10,000 
32 
5 epochs 
1 
0.999 
0.9 

Figure 5 shows that the global reward converges to a maximum value after 3,500 training epochs, which 

means an overall delay reduction for the intersection. 

Figure 5 Global reward convergence over training epochs 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ardeshir Mirbakhsh, Joyoung Lee, and Dejan Besenski 

PROOF OF CONCEPT TEST 

The trained model is applied to a corridor consisting of four intersections to assess its impact on traffic 

flow in an extensive network. The test bed layout is shown in  Figure 6. 

Figure 6 Testbed layout  

The  DSCLS  performance  is  compared  with  other  conventional  and  CAV-based  intersection  control 
systems,  including  1)  fixed  traffic  signal,  2)  actuated  traffic  signal,  and  3)  Longest  Queue  First  (LQF) 
control  logic,  which  was  developed  by  Wunderlich  et  al.  (25).  In  this  algorithm,  the  phases  have  no 
particular order and are triggered based on queue length in different approaches. In our study, the LQF logic 
is  modeled  based  on  pixel  reservation  for  connected  and  autonomous  vehicles,  so  the  only  difference 
between LQF and DSCLS would be the optimization approach. The speed limit is 40.2 km/hr, and three 
different volume regimes described below are considered for evaluation purposes:   

1)  Moderate volume: consists of 1,150 and 850 Veh/hr on the major and minor streets, approximately. 
This volume combination leads to Level Of Service (LOS) B for the major street and LOS C for the 
minor street. 

2)  High volume: consists of 1,600 and 1,100 Veh/hr on the major and minor streets, approximately. 

This volume combination leads to LOS D for both major and minor streets.   

3)  Extreme volume: consists of 2,000 and 1,300 Veh/hr on the major and minor streets, approximately. 

This volume combination leads to LOS F or congestion for major and minor streets.  

The LOS is calculated based on the Highway Capacity Manual (HCM) 6th edition in Vistro, assuming the 
intersection operates under an optimized traffic light. Vistro is a traffic analysis and signal optimization 
software. Simulation time and resolution are set to 60 minutes and two steps/sec accordingly; 20 simulation 
runs with different random seeds are run in VISSIM software for each scenario.  

The Target Traffic Measure Comparison  

Since the control system's optimization goal is to minimize the delay, the delay is specified as the target 
traffic measure. A comparison of the average delay between different control systems appears in Figure 7. 
According  to  the  figure,  the  DSCLS  effectively  reduces  delay  in  all  volume  regimes,  specifically  in 
moderate  volumes,  with  a  50%  delay  reduction  compared  to  the  second-best  control  system.  A  delay 
reduction of 29% and 23% is achieved compared to the second-best control systems in high and extreme 
volume regimes. 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ardeshir Mirbakhsh, Joyoung Lee, and Dejan Besenski 

Figure 7 Average delay comparison 

After delay reductions, travel time improvement is also expected. The average travel time values shown 
in Figure 8, reveal that 22% and 16% travel time reductions are gained compared to the LQF control system 
in moderate and high-volume circumstances. In the extreme volume regime, the proposed control system 
outperforms the actuated control system with an 11% travel time reduction.  

Figure 8 Average travel time comparison 

Other Measures Comparison  

Along with target traffic measures, the environmental and safety impacts of the model are also evaluated. 
Fuel consumption and CO2 emission are calculated based on the VT-Micro model. This model can estimate 
emission and fuel consumption for individual vehicles based on instantaneous acceleration and speed (26). 
The  average  fuel  consumption  results  appear  in  Figure  9;  the  DSCLS  gains  a  9%  fuel  consumption 
reduction in the moderate volume regime compared to the actuated control system. The actuated traffic 
light  outperforms  DSCLS  with  2%  and  6%  fuel  consumption  reductions  in  high  and  extreme  volume 
regimes. However, the proposed control system noticeably outperforms the other pixel reservation-based 
model (LQF), in all volume regimes.  

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ardeshir Mirbakhsh, Joyoung Lee, and Dejan Besenski 

Figure 9 Average fuel consumption 

As shown in Figure 10, average CO2 emission follows the same pattern as average fuel consumption. 
The  DSCLS  outperforms  actuated  traffic  lights  with  a  9%  CO2  emission  improvement.  However,  the 
actuated traffic light performs better than DSCLS with 4% and 7% less CO2 emission in high and extreme 
volume regimes. 

 Despite  acceleration  and  deceleration  rates  for  DSCLS  being  limited  to  fixed  values  only,  fuel 
consumption and emission improve slightly in moderate and high-volume regimes, and a slight increment 
occurs in the extreme volume condition.  

Figure 10 Average CO2 emission 

Among various Surrogate Safety Measures, the Post Encroachment Time (PET) is a well-fitting measure 
to identify safety threats for crossing vehicles at an intersection. It represents the time between the departure 
of  the  encroaching vehicle  from the  conflict  point  and  the  vehicle's  arrival  with  the  right-of-way at  the 
conflict  point  (27).  Safety  analysis  is  performed  in  the  SSAM  software,  automatically  identifying, 
classifying, and evaluating traffic conflicts in the vehicle trajectory data output from microscopic traffic 
simulation  models.  The  comparison  of  PET  for  different  traffic  control  systems  appears  in  Figure  11. 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ardeshir Mirbakhsh, Joyoung Lee, and Dejan Besenski 

According to the figure, pixel reservation-based logics, including DSCLS and LQF, have almost equal PET. 
Both  perform  better  than  the  actuated  traffic  light,  specifically  in  extreme  volume  regimes  with  a  22% 
improvement in PET. Pixel-reservation-based control systems consist of more stop-and-go, which increases 
the chance of an accident in regular intersections. Therefore, even minor improvement in PET compared to 
conventional control systems is noticeable.  

Figure 11 Post encroachment time comparison 

Statistical Analysis of the Simulation Results  

According to the t-test results performed on the simulation results between the DSCLS and other control 
systems, gains from DSCLS compared to the fixed traffic light are statistically significant for all measures 
in all volume regimes. The proposed model's minor losses or gains in fuel consumption and emission are 
not  statistically  significant  compared  to  the  actuated  traffic  lights.  DSCLS  gains  compared  to  LQF  are 
statistically significant in all measures except for safety, which is predictable since both models are based 
on pixel reservation logic to avoid collisions. The t-test results appear in TABLE 2. 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ardeshir Mirbakhsh, Joyoung Lee, and Dejan Besenski 

TABLE 2 P-Values For T-Test Results 

Fixed Traffic Light  
 Moderate volume 

Delay 

Travel Time  

Fuel Consumption 

CO2 Emission 

PET 

<0.05 

<0.05 

S
L
C
S
D

S
L
C
S
D

S
L
C
S
D

Delay 
<0.05 

Delay 
<0.05 

Delay 
<0.05 

Delay 
<0.05 

Delay 
<0.05 

Delay 
<0.05 

Delay 
<0.05 

Delay 
<0.05 

Travel Time  
<0.05 

Travel Time  
<0.05 

Travel Time  
<0.05 

Travel Time  
<0.05 

Travel Time  
<0.05 

Travel Time  
<0.05 

Travel Time  
<0.05 

Travel Time  
<0.05 

<0.05 
High Volume  
Fuel Consumption 
<0.05 
Extreme volume  
Fuel Consumption 
<0.05 
Actuated Traffic Light  
 Moderate volume 
Fuel Consumption 
>0.05 
High Volume  
Fuel Consumption 
>0.05 
Extreme volume  
Fuel Consumption 
>0.05 
LQF 
 Moderate volume 
Fuel Consumption 
<0.05 
High Volume  
Fuel Consumption 
<0.05 
Extreme volume  
Fuel Consumption 
<0.05 

<0.05 

<0.05 

CO2 Emission 
<0.05 

CO2 Emission 
<0.05 

CO2 Emission 
>0.05 

CO2 Emission 
>0.05 

CO2 Emission 
>0.05 

CO2 Emission 
<0.05 

CO2 Emission 
<0.05 

CO2 Emission 
<0.05 

PET 
<0.05 

PET 
<0.05 

PET 
<0.05 

PET 
<0.05 

PET 
<0.05 

PET 
>0.05 

PET 
>0.05 

PET 
>0.05 

CONCLUSIONS  

This paper presented a signal-free intersection control system for CAVs. The control system is based on 
a pixel reservation logic to detect potential colliding movement and a DSCLS, with the optimization goal 
of minimizing the overall delay at the intersection. The traffic volume and vehicle arrival's random seed are 
constant during 3,500 epochs of model training iterations. However, the trained model can deal with any 
volume combination or stochastic vehicle arrivals due to the chain impact of the agent's random actions in 
a DRL training course, known as exploration. The DSCLS is developed as a Python application, controlling 
individual vehicles in VISSIM software.  

Performance of the proposed model is compared with conventional and CAV-based intersection control 
systems, including fixed traffic lights, actuated traffic lights, and LQF, in a corridor of four intersections. 
Based on the simulation results, the DSCLS noticeably outperforms the LQF control system with up to 50% 
and  20%  dealy  and  travel  time  reduction.  Both  CAV-based  control  systems  have  shown  the  same 
performance in safety measures. However, the DSCLS outperforms the LQF in fuel consumption and CO2 
emission by up to 30%. Although the proposed model is based on fixed acceleration and deceleration rates, 
it does not cause any significant losses in fuel consumption and CO2 emission compared to the conventional 
intersection control systems, which is a promising result.  

17 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ardeshir Mirbakhsh, Joyoung Lee, and Dejan Besenski 

CONTRIBUTIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS 

Based on the existing literature, deep reinforcement learning is an outstanding decision-making logic in 
stochastic environments. To the best of the author's knowledge, this research is the first try at deploying 
deep reinforcement learning to manage CAVs' conflicting maneuvers in a roadway network setting. The 
developed  CAV  management  system  can  improve  its  performance  or  adjust  to  the  new  circumstances 
during its life cycle, which is the main challenge in conventional optimization-based control systems. The 
proposed algorithm assumes individual vehicles as independent agents, each having its own optimization 
logic,  and  coordinating  with  other  agents  only  if  required,  which  is  most  likely  how  highly  automated 
vehicles will act in the future.  

This  study's  future  directions  can  be  1)  developing  a  passenger  throughput  optimization-based  or 
emergency  vehicle  priority-based  control  system  by  adjusting  the  reward function,  2)  assuming  several 
accelerations and declaration rates for each vehicle to improve environmental measures, and 3) using other 
DRL methods such as Double DQN and Prioritized Experience Replay to improve DQN's performance.  

REFERENCES 

1.  Urban Mobility Report; 2019. 

2.  Namazi E, Li J. Intelligent Intersection Management Systems Considering Autonomous Vehicles: A 

Systematic Literature Review. IEEE Access. 2019; 7: p. 91946-91965. 

3.  Azimi R, Bhatia G. STIP: Spatio-temporal intersection protocols for autonomous vehicles. In EEE 

International Conference on Cyber-Physical Systems; 2014. 

4.  Graesser L, Keng WL. Foundations of Deep Reinforcement Learning: Pearson Education Inc; 2020. 

5.  Geron A. Hands-on Machine Learning with Scikit-Learn, Keras, and TensorFlow: OREILLY; 2019. 

6.  Dresner K, Stone P. Multiagent traffic management: A reservation-based intersection control 

mechanism. In Proceedings of the Third International Joint Conference on Autonomous Agents and 
Multiagent Systems; 2004. 

7.  Dresner K, Stone P. A Multiagent Approach to Autonomous Intersection Management. Journal of 

Artificial Intelligence Research. 2008; 31: p. 591-656. 

8.  Zhang K, Fortelle A. Analysis and modeled design of one state-driven autonomous passing-through 

algorithm for driverless vehicles at intersections. In 16th IEEE International Conference on 
Computational Science and Engineering; 2015. 

9.  Dustin C, Boyles S, Stone P. Auction-based autonomous intersection management. In IEEE 

Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems; 2013. 

10.  Yan F, Dridi M. Autonomous vehicle sequencing algorithm at isolated intersections. In IEEE 

Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems; 2009. 

11.  Jia W, Abdeljalil AT. Discrete methods for urban intersection traffic controlling. In IEEE Vehicular 

Technology Conference; 2009. 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ardeshir Mirbakhsh, Joyoung Lee, and Dejan Besenski 

12.  Fayazi A, Vahidi A. Optimal scheduling of autonomous vehicle arrivals at intelligent intersections 

via MILP. In Proceedings of the American Control Conference; 2017. 

13.  Lee J, Park B. Cumulative travel-time responsive real-time intersection control algorithm in the 
connected vehicle environment. Journal of Transportation Engineering. 2013; 139(10): p. 1020-
1029. 

14.  Lee J, Park B. Development and Evaluation of a Cooperative Vehicle Intersection Control 

Algorithm Under the Connected Vehicle Environment. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent 
Transportation Systems. 2012; 13. 

15.  Gutesa S, Lee J. Development and Evaluation of Cooperative Intersection Management Algorithm 

under Connected Vehicles Environment. Doctoral Dissertation. 2018. 

16.  Krajewski R, Themann P, Eckstein L. Decoupled cooperative trajectory optimization for connected 
highly automated vehicles at urban intersections. IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium. 2016;(Iv): 
p. 741-746. 

17.  Joo H, Ahmed H. Traffic signal control for smart cities using reinforcement learning. Computer 

Communications. 2020; 154: p. 324-330. 

18.  Lamouik I, Yahyaouy A. Smart multiagent traffic coordinator for autonomous vehicles at 

intersections. In ; 2017. 

19.  Liang X, Du X, Wang G, Han Z. Multi-Agent Deep reinforcement learning for traffic light control 

in vehicular networks. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology. 2018; 69(8). 

20.  Touhbi S, Babram MA. Traffic Signal Control: Exploring Reward Definition For Reinforcement 

Learning. In The 8th International Conference on Ambient Systems; 2017. 

21.  Wu Y, Chen H. DCL-AIM: Decentralized coordination learning of autonomous intersection 

management for connected and automated vehicles. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging 
Technologies. 2019; 103: p. 246-260. 

22.  Mnih V, Kavukcuoglu K, Silver D. Playing Atari with Deep Reinforcement Learning. 

ARXV:1312.5602. 2013. 

23.  Fontana O. Autonomous Systems. [Online].; 2021. Available from: 

https://nealanalytics.com/blog/bringing-ai-from-research-labs-to-real-life-scenarios-with-deep-
reinforcement-learning/. 

24.  Kok J. Sparse Cooperative Q-learning. In Proceedings, Twenty-First International Conference on 

Machine Learning; 2004. 

25.  Wunderlich R, Elhanany I, Urbanik T. A Stable Longest Queue First Signal Scheduling Algorithm 
for an Isolated Intersection. In IEEE International Conference on Vehicular Electronics and Safety, 
ICVES; 2006. 

19 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ardeshir Mirbakhsh, Joyoung Lee, and Dejan Besenski 

26.  Rakha H, Ahn K, Trani A. Development of VT-Micro model for estimating hot stabilized light-duty 
vehicle and truck emissions. Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment. 2004; 
9(1): p. 49-74. 

27.  Gettman D, Head L. Surrogate Safety Measures from Traffic Simulation Models. Transportation 

Research Record. 2003;(1840): p. 104-115. 

28.  Vasirani M, Ossowski S. A computational market for distributed control of urban road traffic 
systems. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems. 2011; 12(2): p. 313-321. 

29.  Chen G, Kang Kyoung D. Win-fit: Efficient intersection management via dynamic vehicle batching 

and scheduling. International Conference on Connected Vehicles and Expo; 2015. 

30.  Mirheli A, Hajbabai L. Development of a signal-head-free intersection control logic in a fully 

connected and autonomous vehicle environment. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging 
Technologies. 2018; 92: p. 412-425. 

20 

 
 
 
 
