Global simulation envelopes for diagnostic plots in

regression models

David I. Warton

School of Mathematics and Statistics and Evolution & Ecology Research Centre,

UNSW Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia

ORCID: 0000-0001-9441-6645

2
2
0
2

g
u
A
3

]
E
M

.
t
a
t
s
[

1
v
1
1
8
1
0
.
8
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
Residual plots are often used to interrogate regression model assump-

tions, but interpreting them requires an understanding of how much

sampling variation to expect when assumptions are satisﬁed. In this pa-

per, we propose constructing global envelopes around data (or around

trends ﬁtted to data) on residual plots, exploiting recent advances that

enable construction of global envelopes around functions by simulation.

While the proposed tools are primarily intended as a graphical aid, they

can be interpreted as formal tests of model assumptions, which enables

the study of their properties via simulation experiments. We considered

three model scenarios – ﬁtting a linear model, generalized linear model

or generalized linear mixed model – and explored the power of global

simulation envelope tests constructed around data on quantile-quantile

plots, or around trend lines on residual vs ﬁts plots or scale-location

plots. Global envelope tests compared favorably to commonly used tests

of assumptions at detecting violations of distributional and linearity as-

sumptions. Freely available R software (ecostats::plotenvelope) en-

ables application of these tools to any ﬁtted model that has methods for

the simulate, residuals and predict functions.

Keywords: assumption checking, goodness-of-ﬁt test, Monte Carlo sim-

ulation, normal quantile plot, parametric bootstrap, residuals vs ﬁts plot

When ﬁtting a regression model, residual plots are typically relied upon as a diagnos-

tic tool to check assumptions are reasonable. However, a challenge for interpretation

is that residuals will always stray from expected trends to some extent – we would

like to know if deviations from expected patterns are large relative to sampling

variation.

One way to compare observed patterns to expected sampling variation is to con-

2

struct a global envelope – a region of the diagnostic plot within which we expect

the observed data to always lie if assumptions are satisﬁed (at a chosen level of

conﬁdence 1 − α). Rosenkrantz (2000) developed an approach to construct global

conﬁdence bands around a quantile-quantile (or “QQ”-) plot, under the assumption

that observations are independent and normally distributed, by exploiting Mood

joint conﬁdence sets for the mean and variance. Aldor-Noiman et al. (2013) de-

vised a closely related method, but used simulation to estimate the desired multiple

testing correction needed for global envelopes.

Many regression models do not assume errors are independent and normally dis-

tributed, as for example when analysing discrete data (Figure 1). In such cases sim-

ulation could be used to construct envelopes, repeatedly simulating new responses

from the ﬁtted model, reﬁtting the model and constructing residuals. Moral et al.

(2017) used this approach to generate pointwise simulation envelopes around half

normal plots. Note however that pointwise envelopes can be quite misleading, as

they do not correct for multiple testing. The chance that not all observations fall

inside a pointwise envelope can be much higher than the nominal rate, so na¨ıve

interpretation of pointwise envelopes could too often lead to the conclusion that

assumptions have been violated, in situations where they have not been violated.

What is needed here is to construct global simulation envelopes – controlling the

chance that all observations are contained inside the simulation envelope, across

datasets that satisfy model assumptions.

This paper describes a method of constructing global simulation envelopes for resid-

ual plots from any ﬁtted model, using the method of Myllym¨aki et al. (2017). Their

method was designed as a diagnostic tool for point patterns, but in principle, it

can be used to construct global simulation envelopes around any function. Their

method is used in this paper to construct global simulation envelopes around three

commonly used types of residual plot (Figure 1), and the properties of this ap-

3

proach is explored by simulation. Simulations show that, while intended primarily

as a visual tool, this method actually has power that is competitive with formal

tests designed to interrogate model assumptions. The method proposed here has

been implemented on R as the plotenvelope function in the ecostats package, and

can in principle be applied to any model object that has methods for the simulate,

residuals and predict functions.

1 Global envelopes

Assume we have a diagnostic plot which deﬁnes a function T (r) over some set of

values r ∈ I, which could be an interval, or a discrete set of values. In constructing

a 100(1 − α)% level global envelope over I, we want to ﬁnd functions Tlow(r) and

Tupp(r) such that when the assumed regression model is satisﬁed

P [∃r ∈ I : T (r) /∈ (Tlow(r), Tupp(r))] = α

1.1 Constructing global envelopes via simulation

Myllym¨aki et al. (2017) proposed a method of constructing a global envelope for

T (r) via simulation – we obtain a set of simulated realisations of the function Tb(r)

for b = 2, . . . , B, where we additionally include T1(r) = T (r), the observed function,

in this sample. While Myllym¨aki et al. (2017) were motivated by the problem of

diagnosing goodness-of-ﬁt in point process models, e.g. using Ripley’s (1976) K-

function, the approach could equally well be applied to any type of function. Here

we will deﬁne functions using common residual diagnostic plots, and simulate new

residuals by simulating data from the ﬁtted regression model, reﬁtting the regression

model, and recomputing the residuals (a residual “parametric bootstrap”, Davison

and Hinkley, 1997).

4

The core idea (Myllym¨aki et al., 2017) is to construct a global statistic that measures

the maximal distance u of each function Tb(r) from the centre of the B functions

T0(r), and construct envelopes such that the (1 − α)-quantile of u is only exceeded

with probability α. For example, we could compute the maximum absolute diﬀerence

(MAD) measure, as compared to the mean function, and construct global envelopes

based on absolute distance from T0(b). Speciﬁcally, if we let the mean function be

T0(r) = 1
B

(cid:80)B

b=1 Ti(r), then for each function Tb(r) we compute ub = max
r∈I

|Tb(r) −

T0(r)|. We can then construct a 100(1 − α)% global envelope as

(T0(r) − u1−α, T0(r) + u1−α)

where u1−α is the (1 − α)-quantile of the ub. Since u1−α is only exceeded by a

proportion α of the ub, only a proportion α of the simulated functions Tb(r) will

stray outside this envelope.

In the special case where we construct global simulation envelopes using MAD on a

probability (PP-) plot of residuals, we can deﬁne Tb(r) as empirical distribution func-

tions of data simulated under the hypothesized model, and the absolute diﬀerence

|Tb(r) − T0(r)| is then the Kolomogorov-Smirnov test statistic.

An issue with using MAD is that T (r) may have non-constant variance – in fact for

most diagnostic plots we consider below, we would expect T (r) to have a smaller

variance for intermediate values of r. We will compute the pointwise sample variance

function var(T (r)) = 1
B−1

(cid:80)B

b=1 (Tb(r) − T0(r))2 and measure maximal standardized

distance between Tb(r) and T0(r), computed as vb = max
r∈I

|Tb(r)−T0(r)|
√
var(T (r))

. Hence we

construct a Studentized MAD global envelope (Myllym¨aki et al., 2017):

(cid:16)

T0(r) − v1−α

(cid:112)var(T (r)), T0(r) + v1−α

(cid:17)
(cid:112)var(T (r))

where as before v1−α is the (1 − α)-quantile of the vb. Up to Monte Carlo error, this

envelope provides an exact global test of a simple hypothesis, where the distribution

5

of simulated data has been exactly speciﬁed (Myllym¨aki et al., 2017). The method

is often conservative for composite hypotheses, where the distribution we wish to

sample from is a function of unknown parameters (Myllym¨aki et al., 2017). When

using global simulation envelopes to diagnose regression models, we ﬁnd ourselves

in this latter situation. Software to compute Studentized MAD global envelopes is

available on R in GET::global_envelope_test using the option type="st".

1.2 Diagnostic plots in regression models

Now consider the situation where we have univariate responses stored in a vector

y of length n, with the ith observation denoted yi for i = 1, . . . , n. We can deﬁne

vectors of linear predictors ˆη = g( ˆµ) and residuals e, whose ith elements are ˆηi

and ei. The residual ei is some pre-deﬁned function of yi and ˆηi, an ideal choice

being a function such that the distribution of residuals does not vary as a function

of linear predictors when assumptions are satisﬁed. There are many diﬀerent types

of diagnostic plot that could be constructed. Below we describe three commonly

used plots, and how we deﬁne the interval I and the function T (r) for each plot:

QQ-plot: This is a plot of sorted residuals against theoretical normal quantiles. Let

e(i) be the ith residual when placed in rank order. In a normal quantile or “QQ”-
plot we plot e(i) against zi = Φ−1 (cid:0) i−0.5
(cid:1) for i = 1, . . . , n, where Φ(z) = P(Z ≤ z)

n

is the cumulative distribution function of the standard normal distribution Z ∼

N (0, 1). Inverting this formula for zi, we get i = nΦ(zi) + 0.5.

We deﬁne as our function the sorted residual, as a function of its corresponding

normal quantile. Speciﬁcally, we let I be the set of normal quantiles {z1, . . . , zn},

and T (r) = e(nΦ(r)+0.5).

Residuals vs ﬁts plot: We plot residuals ei against linear predictors ˆηi, for i =

1, . . . , n.

If there is no violation of the mean model, residuals ei should have

6

no trend, as a function of linear predictors. We can diagnose this by ﬁtting a

smoother to the residuals, as a function of linear predictors:

ei = f (ˆηi) + (cid:15)i

where (cid:15)i are errors centred on zero, and f (·) is estimated using some non-

parametric or semi-parametric regression method. We will estimate f (·) using

thin plate regression splines (Wood, 2003), assuming the (cid:15)i are Gaussian with

constant variance, using mgcv::gam on R with maximum likelihood estimation

(Wood, 2011, method="ml").

The function we will use as a diagnostic tool for residual vs ﬁts plots is the

smoother deﬁned above, T (r) = f (r), acting on the interval containing the ob-

served range of linear predictors, I = (min(ˆηi), max(ˆηi)).

Scale vs location plot: To look for violation of variance assumptions it is common

to plot the absolute value of residuals |ei| against linear predictors ˆηi, for i =

1, . . . , n. If there is no violation of the mean model, there should be no trend. We

can diagnose this by ﬁtting a smoother to |ei|, as a function of linear predictors:

|ei| = fs(ˆηi) + (cid:15)i

where as previously (cid:15)i are errors centred on zero, and we will estimate fs(·) using

mgcv::gam(..., method="ml").

The function we will use as a diagnostic tool for scale-location plots is the

smoother deﬁned above, T (r) = fs(r), acting on the interval containing the

observed range of linear predictors, I = (min(ˆηi), max(ˆηi)).

1.3 Global envelopes for residual plots

We have described how to construct a global envelope via simulation, using the

methods of Myllym¨aki et al. (2017), given a set of simulated functions Tb(r), b =

7

1, . . . B, and we have deﬁned three diﬀerent types of function T (r) based on diﬀerent

residual diagnostic plots that could be used to query goodness-of-ﬁt of a regression

model M((cid:98)θ) that has been ﬁtted to sample data y. We will construct simulated

realisations of these functions by simulating data yb from the ﬁtted regression model

and recomputing the relevant residual function Tb(r), for each b = 1, . . . , B, as

follows:

• Simulate data yb from ﬁtted regression model, M((cid:98)θ)

• Reﬁt the regression model to simulated data, to obtain M((cid:98)θb)

• Compute residuals eb for the simulated data yb from the reﬁtted model M((cid:98)θb),

and (if required) linear predictors (cid:98)ηb.

• Hence compute Tb(r) from eb and (if required) (cid:98)ηb.

Note that this procedure requires us to ﬁt the model M(θ) to data B times, which

can potentially be quite computationally intensive, if the model cannot be ﬁtted

quickly.

On R, the ecostats::plotenvelope function has been written to implement this

approach, for the three diagnostic plots described above, producing output along

the lines of Figure 1. By default this function constructs Studentized MAD global

envelopes from B = 200 sets of residuals, see the software for further options. The

ecostats::plotenvelope function can be applied in principle to any model object

that has methods for the simulate, residuals and predict functions.

2 Simulations

Although global simulation envelopes are proposed here primarily as a graphical aid,

they can also be used to construct formal tests of assumptions. Simulations have

been undertaken to study the performance of such tests, as compared to some other

8

Figure 1: Example diagnostic plots with global simulation envelopes, constructed

using ecostats::plotenvelope, using three types of residual plot: (a) a QQ-plot,

(b) a residual vs ﬁtted values plot, (c) a scale-location plot. A Poisson loglinear

model with a random intercept was ﬁtted to the Salamanders dataset (Price et al.,

2016) available in the glmmTMB package on R, and Pearson residuals computed from

the ﬁt. Note from (a) that several points on the QQ-plot fall outside their simulation

envelope (taking unusually large values), and there is an increasing trend on the

scale-location plot, which strays outside its envelope. Both of these trends are

suggestive of overdispersion.

9

commonly available tests of model ﬁt, for situations where we have n univariate

responses yi, i = 1, . . . , n, assumed to be related to a single predictor xi via a linear

function ηi = β0 + xiβ1, and we ﬁt one of three diﬀerent types of model for the

response yi:

(a) A linear model, yi ∼ N (ηi, σ2), ﬁtted on R using the lm function.

(b) A Poisson log-linear model, yi ∼ P(exp{ηi}), ﬁtted on R using the glm function.

(c) A Poisson log-linear model with random intercept term, yi ∼ P(exp{ηi+(cid:15)i mod 5})

where (cid:15)j ∼ N (0, ω2) for j ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3, 4}, ﬁtted on R using the glmmTMB::glmmTMB

function. The normally distributed random intercept that has been added to the

linear predictor can take ﬁve diﬀerent values, which we cycle through repeatedly as

we move through the dataset.

The glmmTMB package (Brooks et al., 2017), used to ﬁt Model (c), is an alternative

to the widely used lme4 package (Bates et al., 2015).

It is used here because it

tends to provide faster, more stable ﬁts (while also having a broader range of pos-

sible variance structures and family arguments). This extra functionality is made

available via Template Model Builder (Kristensen et al., 2016), an environment for

statistical model-building that makes use of automatic diﬀerentiation and C++ for

computational expediency.

Standardized residuals were used to evaluate ﬁts of Model (a) via the rstandard

function, which are normally distributed when assumptions are satisﬁed. For Model

(b) we used deviance residuals (Garc´ıa et al., 2012), the default residual output for

glm. These were unavailable in glmmTMB for Model (c) so we constructed Pearson
residuals (ei = (yi − (cid:98)µi)/(cid:112)
(cid:98)µi). Note that in both (b) and (c), residuals are not nor-
mally distributed when assumptions are satisﬁed, motivating the use of simulation

to construct global envelopes for residual plots.

Models (a-c) were each ﬁtted to data simulated under settings similar to what was

10

assumed by the corresponding model, but under three diﬀerent conﬁgurations, cor-

responding to three diﬀerent types of assumption violations. Speciﬁcally, in each

case the linear predictor used in simulations had the form

ηi = β0 + 4xi + β2x2
i ,

but data were simulated under the following three diﬀerent conﬁgurations:

Assumptions satisﬁed Data were simulated from Models (a-c) as described previ-

ously, with β0 = −2, β2 = 0, σ = 0.25 and ω = 1.

Mixture distribution A 9:1 mixture of responses was simulated as follows:

(a) yi ∼ 0.9N (ηi, σ2) + 0.1N (ηi, (4σ)2)

(b) yi ∼ 0.9P(exp{ηi}) + 0.1P(4 exp{ηi})

(c) yi ∼ 0.9P(exp{ηi + (cid:15)i mod 5}) + 0.1P(4 exp{ηi + (cid:15)i mod 5})

with β0 = −2, β2 = 0, σ = 0.25 and ω = 1 as before. Note that each of Models (a-

c) correctly specify the functional form of their respective model for the marginal

mean – linearity is preserved in (a), and log-linearity in (b-c) – but distributional

assumptions of each model have been violated.

Quadratic response Data were simulated from Models (a-c) with β0 = 1 and β2 = −4

(and, as previously, σ = 0.25 and ω = 1). This produced (on the linear predictor

scale) a parabolic response whose axis of symmetry was at the centre of the xi,

and whose values for the ηi were centred on similar values to those produced by

other simulation scenarios.

This gives a total of nine simulation scenarios, consisting of three models (a-c) ﬁtted

under each of three assumption violation conﬁgurations. Under each scenario, 100

datasets were simulated at each of four diﬀerent sample sizes – n ∈ {10, 20, 40, 80}.

The following tests were compared, in terms of their rejection rate at the α = 0.05

level:

11

• Global simulation envelopes around smoothers on a residual vs ﬁts plot or scale-

location plot as described in the previous section (using Studentized MAD en-

velopes). We expected the residual vs ﬁts plot to be useful for detecting assumption

violations in Quadratic response simulations, and the scale-location plot to be

more useful for Mixture distribution simulations.

• Global simulation envelopes around a normal quantile (QQ-) plot or a probability

(PP-) plot (Studentized MAD envelopes). We expected these to be most useful in

Mixture distribution simulations.

• A Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, computed by constructing a MAD global simulation

envelope on a PP-plot. Note this is not a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for normality –

it is a test that the empirical distribution of the observed residuals is consistent with

their theoretical distribution (as estimated by simulation), which is not Gaussian

for Models (b-c).

• For Model (a), a Shapiro-Wilks test was computed using the shapiro.test func-

tion on R.

• For Models (b-c), the maximized log-likelihood was used as a goodness-of-ﬁt test

statistic, and compared to its null distribution as estimated from simulated datasets

yb described previously. Lack-of-ﬁt is indicated if the observed value log L(θ, y) is

small compared to values computed for data simulated under the assumed model,

log L(θ, yb).

In all cases, simulation envelopes were constructed using 99 simulated datasets (in

addition to the observed data), and interpreted as a hypothesis test by asking

whether the observed data (or smoother) fell outside its 95% global envelope at

any stage. Simulations were quite computationally intensive, requiring a total of

over 40 hours on an Intel i7 3GhZ processor with 16GB RAM.

Results for these nine simulation scenarios are summarized in Figure 2. Note ﬁrstly

12

that the global envelopes all adequately control Type I error (Figure 2, left), al-

though some methods were conservative, as might be expected (Myllym¨aki et al.,

2017). When looking at power of diﬀerent methods to detect assumption violations,

the most striking result was that the most eﬀective tools were simulation envelopes

around a QQ-plot or a residual vs ﬁts plot, for mixture distributions (Figure 2,

centre) and quadratic response (Figure 2, right), respectively. Note that global

envelopes on a QQ-plot performed comparably to a Shapiro-Wilks test at ﬁnding

violations of normality (Figure 2a, centre) and better than a deviance test at de-

tecting violations of a Poisson assumption (Figure 2b-c, centre). When there was a

quadratic response to predictors, a global envelope around a smoother on a residual

vs ﬁts plot was by far the most eﬀective method (Figure 2a-b, right), although this

performed poorly for the Poisson mixed model (Figure 2c, right), where a QQ-plot

was the best method. Note that for non-Gaussian models there was some inter-

action between non-normality and non-linearity, with residual vs ﬁts plots having

some power to detect mixture distributions and a QQ-plot having at times quite

good power to detect non-linearity.

As a secondary result, note that the scale on which diagnostic tools are plotted was

important – QQ-plots consistently outperformed PP-plots at detecting assumption

violations. This was expected since assumption violations occurred in the tails of the

distribution, and plotting residuals on the quantile scale puts the emphasis on the

tails, whereas a PP-plot transforms residuals to ﬁt in the unit interval. While the

Kolmogorov-Smirnov and PP-plot envelopes tended to perform similarly, the PP-

plot performed considerably better at detecting non-normality (Figure 2a, centre).

The only diﬀerence between these methods was that the PP-plot used a Studentized

envelope, rather than a ﬁxed width envelope. This highlights that subtle changes

in the method of constructing global envelopes can have considerable impacts on

performance of the method as a diagnostic tool.

13

Figure 2: Simulation results when ﬁtting Models (a-c) to data simulated under

the assumed model (left column), from a mixture distribution (centre) or with a

quadratic response to the predictor (right). Note in particular that all global simu-

lation envelopes adequately control Type I error (left), that envelopes around QQ-

plots (green solid line) were most eﬀective at ﬁnding violations of distributional

assumptions (center), and envelopes around a smoother on a residual vs ﬁts plot

(green dashed line) was most eﬀective at ﬁnding violations of linearity (right) for

Models (a-b).

14

A global envelope around the smoother on a scale-location plot was the least eﬀective

of the proposed methods. As expected, it was useful for identifying distributional

assumption violations (Figure 2, centre), but was noticeably less eﬀective than a QQ-

plot, or a Shapiro-Wilks test of normality (Figure 2a, centre), or a deviance-based

test for Poisson data (Figure 2b, centre).

3 Discussion

In this paper we showed how recent advances in tools for global simulation envelopes

can be used to aid in the interpretation of common residual plots. While these

tools are intended as graphical aids, they could be interpreted as formal tests, and

simulations suggest they tend to compare favorably to common goodness-of-ﬁt tests.

Global simulation envelopes have previously been proposed for QQ-plots (Rosenkrantz,

2000; Aldor-Noiman et al., 2013), assuming residuals are Gaussian and indepen-

dently and identically distributed (“iid”). However, one or both of the Gaussian

and iid assumptions will not be satisﬁed for residuals from many types of regression

model, an issue which we resolve here by using simulation to explore the expected dis-

tribution of residuals and residual functions, by simulating data from the true model

and recomputing residuals. We have demonstrated the method for linear models,

generalized linear models and generalized linear mixed models, and provided soft-

ware (the plotenvelope function in the ecostats package) that computes global

simulation envelopes for various types of residual plot for these models and more.

The performance of the global envelope tests depend heavily on the type of residual e

used to construct plots, the scale on which residuals are plotted, and if envelopes are

constructed around smoothers, the method of smoother construction, as discussed

in more detail below.

15

The way residuals are constructed is clearly an important consideration when con-

structing any residual plot. In preliminary investigations, we found for example that

when ﬁtting a generalized linear mixed model, residual plots had diﬃculty detect-

ing violations of distributional assumptions (Figure 2c, centre) when using unscaled

residuals (yi − (cid:98)µi) rather than Pearson residuals. A potentially useful alternative
way to construct residuals for non-Gaussian models is randomized quantile residuals

(Dunn and Smyth, 1996), which introduce jittering to discrete data to ensure that

residuals computed from the true model will be marginally standard normal, for any

parametric model. Such residuals can be computed on R for generalized linear mixed

models using the statmod::qres function, and can be computed by simulation from

broader classes of distribution using the DHARMa package (Hartig, 2022).

The scale on which residuals are plotted can also be important to performance of

global envelopes, as evidenced by the diﬀerences in performance between QQ-plots

and PP-plots (Figure 2, centre and right). QQ-plots consistently outperformed

PP-plots, and the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, which can be interpreted as a MAD

global envelope test on a PP-plot. The essential diﬀerence between these types of

plot is that QQ-plots compare residuals to normal quantiles, whereas PP-plots ﬁrst

map residuals to the unit interval, then compare to standard uniform quantiles.

But violations of assumptions typically are expressed in the tails of a distribution,

with the occasional very large (in magnitude) residual. When converted to the unit

interval, such outliers become values that are unusually close to zero or one, which

does not provide a strong visual cue. For example, in Figure 1, a striking feature

is the outlying Pearson residual, with a value of about 15, which had an expected

normal quantile closer to 3. On a PP-plot, this would be expressed as a probability

that was equal to one up to machine error, as compared to an expected probability

of 0.998. Mapping residuals to the unit interval compresses the regions of primary

interest to narrow ranges of values, making it diﬃcult to diagnose violations of

16

assumptions. For this reason Dunn and Smyth (1996) advocated mapping quantile

residuals to the normal distribution.

Preliminary investigations also suggested that when constructing a global envelope

around a smoother, performance of envelope tests was sensitive to the method of

smoother construction. When using the default mgcv::gam method, which mini-

mizes a generalized cross validation (GCV) measure, our smoothers had quite poor

performance at detecting assumption violations. The relatively good performance

seen in Figure 2 was achieved through use of maximum likelihood estimation to ﬁt

smoothers (method="ml"), which is noticeably more computationally intensive, but

known to perform better at estimating smooth functions, largely eliminating the

chance of “severe undersmoothing failures” seen in GCV techniques (Wood, 2011).

Finally, it is worth reminding the practitioner that signiﬁcant violations of assump-

tions are not necessarily of practical importance. Linear models for example are

known to be quite robust to violations of normality due to the Central Limit The-

orem, especially at large sample sizes. Large sample sizes however lead to narrower

simulation envelopes and a greater chance of detecting assumption violations, in the

very situation where they are less important. It should always be kept in mind by

the practitioner that global envelopes are graphical tools that show how large devi-

ations are relative to those that might be expected due to sampling error, but they

do not indicate if deviations are large enough to be of practical importance. Eﬀect

size is best measured by looking at the magnitude of deviations from expected be-

haviour, rather than just looking at whether these deviations stray outside a global

envelope.

Disclosure statement

The author reports there are no competing interests to declare.

17

REFERENCES

Aldor-Noiman, S., Brown, L. D., Buja, A., Rolke, W., and Stine, R. A. “The Power

to See: A New Graphical Test of Normality Statistical Computing and Graphics

The Power to See: A New Graphical Test of Normality.” (2013).

Bates, D., M¨achler, M., Bolker, B. M., and Walker, S. C. “Fitting Linear Mixed-

Eﬀects Models Using lme4.” Journal of Statistical Software, 67:1–48 (2015).

Brooks, M. E., Kristensen, K., van Benthem, K. J., Magnusson, A., Berg, C. W.,

Nielsen, A., Skaug, H. J., M¨achler, M., and Bolker, B. M. “glmmTMB balances

speed and ﬂexibility among packages for zero-inﬂated generalized linear mixed

modeling.” R Journal , 9:378–400 (2017).

Davison, A. C. and Hinkley, D. V. Bootstrap methods and their application. 1.

Cambridge university press (1997).

Dunn, P. K. and Smyth, G. K. “Randomized Quantile Residuals.” Journal of

Computational and Graphical Statistics, 5:236–244 (1996).

Garc´ıa, M., V´ıctor, B. ., Yohai, J., Ben, M. G., and Yohai, V. J. “Quantile–Quantile

Plot for Deviance Residuals in the Generalized Linear Model.” Journal of Com-

putational and Graphical Statistics, 13:36–47 (2012).

Hartig, F. DHARMa: Residual Diagnostics for Hierarchical (Multi-Level / Mixed)

Regression Models (2022). R package version 0.4.5.

URL https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=DHARMa

Kristensen, K., Nielsen, A., Berg, C. W., Skaug, H., and Bell, B. M. “TMB: Au-

tomatic Diﬀerentiation and Laplace Approximation.” Journal of Statistical Soft-

ware, 70:1–21 (2016).

18

Moral, R. A., Hinde, J., and Dem´etrio, C. G. “Half-normal plots and overdispersed

models in R: The hnp package.” Journal of Statistical Software, 81 (2017).

Myllym¨aki, M., Mrkviˇcka, T., Grabarnik, P., Seijo, H., and Hahn, U. “Global

envelope tests for spatial processes.” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society:

Series B (Statistical Methodology), 79:381–404 (2017).

Price, S. J., Muncy, B. L., Bonner, S. J., Drayer, A. N., and Barton, C. D. “Eﬀects

of mountaintop removal mining and valley ﬁlling on the occupancy and abundance

of stream salamanders.” Journal of Applied Ecology, 53:459–468 (2016).

Ripley, B. D. “The second-order analysis of stationary point processes.” Journal of

Applied Probability, 13:255–266 (1976).

Rosenkrantz, W. A. “Conﬁdence Bands for Quantile Functions: A Parametric and

Graphic Alternative for Testing Goodness of Fit.” American Statistician, 54:185–

190 (2000).

Wood, S. N. “Thin plate regression splines.” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society:

Series B (Statistical Methodology), 65:95–114 (2003).

—. “Fast stable restricted maximum likelihood and marginal likelihood estimation

of semiparametric generalized linear models.” Journal of the Royal Statistical

Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology), 73:3–36 (2011).

19

