Preprint 

A Knowledge Graph-Based Method for Automating Systematic 
Literature Reviews 
Nada Sahlab*, Hesham Kahoul,* Nasser Jazdi*, Michael Weyrich* 

*University of Stuttgart, Institute of Industrial Automation and Software Engineering 
Pfaffenwaldring 47, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany. Firstname.lastname@ias.uni-stuttgart.de 

Abstract 

Systematic Literature Reviews aim at investigating current approaches to conclude a research gap or determine a 
futuristic approach. They represent a significant part of a research activity, from which new concepts stem. However, 
with the massive availability of publications at a rapid growing rate, especially digitally, it becomes challenging to 
efficiently screen and assess relevant publications. Another challenge is the continuous assessment of related work 
over a long period of time and the  consequent need for a continuous update, which can be a time-consuming task. 
Knowledge  graphs  model  entities  in  a  connected  manner  and  enable  new  insights  using  different  reasoning  and 
analysis methods. 

The objective of this work is to present an approach to partially automate the conduction of a Systematic Literature 
Review as well as classify and visualize the results as a knowledge graph. The designed software prototype was used 
for  the  conduction  of  a  review  on  context-awareness  in  automation  systems  with  considerably  accurate  results 
compared to a manual conduction.  

Keywords: Systematic Literature Review; context-aware automation systems; cyber-physical systems; knowledge graph 

1. Introduction 

Literature reviews are a significant part of a research activity, based on which an overview on a certain research topic 
can be given as well as conclusions drawn for  the assessment of own work. Some methods exist for conducting a 
systematic literature review, where the process is divided into several steps starting with the design, the conduction of 
the review as well as the analysis and documentation of results. Some of the notable methods are presented in [1] and 
[2]. So far, systematic literature reviews are conducted manually, which can be an effortful task, especially due to the 
wide search scope across digital libraries and the necessary filtration of findings. With regard to electronic databases 
containing  publications,  a  continuous  growth  of  stored  publications  makes  a  correct  assessment,  filtration  and 

1877-0509 Preprint 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 

Sahlab et.al/Preprint 

selection of related work cumbersome, even with using available extended search strings. As research is evolving and 
continuously being extended with new approaches and work, an automated support for conducting a literature review 
is needed. Conducting a systematic literature review is usually an activity for early or late research phases. Having a 
continuously  updated  view  on  the  progression  of  research  with  regard  to  a  certain  topic  can  be  beneficial  in 
benchmarking the own approach and finding correlations or discrepancies. Therefore, a need to represent publications 
in a connected manner, while relating them to specific aspects within a research topic arises. Several approaches such 
as connected papers [3] and Academic Knowledge Graph [4] present publications as a connected graph based on topic 
similarity in order to give researchers an overview on the relatedness of subjects and authors as well as highlight on 
influential  and highly  cited  works.  Mostly,  the  research  topics  presented  by  these  approaches  are  general  and  not 
tailored to a specific literature review. Knowledge graphs (KG) define a network of domain information represented 
as nodes and connected via edges, which evolve and allow inferences. Using a knowledge graph to represent findings 
for a systematic literature review enables efficient analysis as well as improved conclusions.  
The objective of this work is therefore twofold: First to present an approach to partly automate the conduction of a 
systematic literature review by designing interfaces to digital libraries and embedding search criteria as well as using 
natural language processing to further filter and classify results. The second objective is to present publications as a 
knowledge graph and enable an enhanced analysis by querying the graph. The rest of the paper is structured as follows, 
in section 2, an overview on systematic literature reviews as well as related work is provided. In section 3, the concept 
is described and presented with a use case in section 4. An evaluation of the methodology is provided with regard to 
the accuracy of the results in section 5. To conclude, section 6 provides a summary and an outlook.  

2. Preliminaries 

2.1. Systematic Literature Reviews 

 According to [5], a Systematic Literature Review (SLR) is a strategy to recognize, assess and summarize the state-
of-the-art of a particular subject within the literature. SLRs collect publications, literature and information, allowing 
a thorough methodological and objective investigation as opposed to conventional surveys. An SLR has the goal of 
forming a ground for a specific topic and work out a systematic outline for works related to it in literature.   

As mentioned in [1, 6], an SLR consists of three consecutive parts: planning the review, conducting the review and 
documenting it (Fig 1.). In the first phase, a research question is  formulated and further steps for carrying out the 
review are designed and iteratively validated. Depending on the defined research questions, the following steps are 
conducted.  The  conduction  phase  follows,  where  the  literature  review  takes  place.  To  constrain  the  search  scope, 
inclusion and exclusion criteria are defined, which limit the review to certain types of literature, a certain domain or a 
time-limit for the review. For the search, a backward or forward search is possible. Backward searches rely on cited 
work in specific publications whereas forward search is by using search engines for instance.  

Keywords used in the search process play a vital role in the identification of correct literature. The keywords should 
be extracted from the research questions which are framed previously. Going through the different publications and 
acquiring the data is conducted in 2 steps, where first an initial screening of the abstract and if relevant a detailed 
reading of the publication takes place. Quality assessment criteria are defined to have an evaluating schema for the 
acquired data and its analysis. For the synthesis of data, statistical approaches can be applied to show the results as 
well as further descriptive methods.  

 
Sahlab et.al/ Preprint 

 3 

Figure 1 Systematic Literature Review Stages 

2.2. Academic Knowledge Graphs 

In recent years, some approaches to visualize and create bibliometric networks were presented. The aim of these 
approaches is to visualize papers, while highlighting on their connectedness and similarity. In the following sections, 
some approaches are discussed.  

2.2.1.  Connected Papers 

Connected Papers is a connected graph approach to show similarity between publications even if there is no direct 
citation and to infer topic similarity. Publications which do not explicitly cite one another can also be closely linked 
and placed together in the graph. Technically, the resemblance of the paper in the graph is mostly centered on the 
notions of bibliographic linkage and co-citation. As per this criterion, two articles with a lot of identical citations and 
references are more likely to deal with the same topic area.  

The Connected Papers graph is developed in such a way that it draws attention to the most relevant and essential 
papers straight away. The graph has an algorithm in the form of a layout, where identical papers are clustered together 
in space and are further connected together by thick lines called edges. Frequently cited papers are depicted by bigger 
nodes and the recently published papers are indicated in a darker color. [3] 

2.2.2. AceMaps 

Another  approach  to  build  a  knowledge  graph  based  on  literature  publications  is  the  open-source  Multimodal 
Geoscience Academic Knowledge Graph [7], which aims at encompassing domain knowledge in different research 
fields.  

The  approach  offers  an  ontology  with  millions  of  entities.  The  graph  entities  include  information  about  the 
affiliation, author and so on. The ontology and the dataset are open to use, and this approach provides insights about 
trending fields and authors based on the modeled knowledge about their publications and citations.  

2.2.3. VosViewer 

 VosViewer  [8]  is  a  tool  for  mapping  and  constructing  bibliometric  networks  based  on  co-authorship  or  co-
occurence.  The  approach  focuses  on  distance-based  visualization  of  literature  to  indicate  similarity  between 
publications, using which, publications in a specific field with high impact can be identified.  

2.2.4. Other Related Work 

In [9], an approach for automating the structuring and clustering of concepts related to specific research topics is 
presented. SciKGraph is a software that aims at automating the structuring of concepts and topics within a scientific 
domain using a semantic-based analysis and clustering mechanisms. Documents are classified using Natural Language 
Processing with results showing high accuracy.  

In  [10],  an  ontology  for  semantic  surveys  (SemSur)  is  presented  with  the  aim  of  altering  the  way  researchers 
conduct and present surveys by using a common base and presenting findings as a knowledge graph. Using the content 

 
 
 
 
4 

Sahlab et.al/Preprint 

of some survey papers, useful information could be extracted with the help of queries. A contribution was therefore 
made to how survey papers are presented.  

2.2.5. Concluding Remarks 

The presented approaches show how a presentation of connectedness and similarity among publications can be of 
support for researchers to find influential publications and expand their base of related work.  Other works highlight 
on  the  common  understanding  using  semantic  technologies.  Although  providing  support  and  proposing  paradigm 
shifts, the approaches are mainly visual or consider the extraction of information from already present publications. 
Extending this support by customizing and presenting  search results from various digital libraries for a systematic 
literature review is a further step addressed by the proposed concept, which will be described in the following chapter.  

3. A Knowledge-Graph Based Methodology for Automating Systematic Literature Reviews 

3.1. Concept Overview 

In the following section, the approach of partially automating the SLR conduction is presented.  
As mentioned in [1, 6, 11], it is essential as a first step of SLR, to formulate research questions (RQ). As shown in 
Fig.1, the first stage of the SLR cannot be automated as researchers need to identify what they want to capture from 
the SLR process and why. The second stage of the SLR consists of five different sub-stages. The first sub-stage is 
identifying  the  channels  for  literature  search.  As  mentioned  in  [5],  there  are  three  main  ways  to  search  for  data 
concerning certain topics, which can be via backward searching, forward searching and electronic databases. In this 
study, searching the electronic databases will be used to automate the process of the SLR.  

Consequently, the inclusion/exclusion criteria must be identified. All electronic databases that are used in this study 
provide advanced search that helps in including only certain publications that are studying some topics. In order to 
use the advanced search, Boolean operators are used between search terms such as (AND &  OR) operators to only 
search for specific keywords that are extracted from the research questions. Stage 2  is automated with regard to the 
collection of data and its representation as a knowledge graph. The quality assessment, which requires reviewing the 
full text manually by the researcher is therefore not considered. For synthetizing and presenting the results, a partial 
automation via generic queries of the knowledge graph is possible.  

3.2. Data Acquisition 

In order to conduct SLR automatically, a python-based interface is used to extract data from different electronic 
databases  for  applying  further  analysis  on  them.  Here,  different  keywords  and  the  inclusion/exclusion  criteria  are 
embedded them into the database URL. The HTML of the database are then parsed, and specific data extracted.  
 Table 1 represents the data extracted from the publications within the databases. 

No.  
1 
2 
3 
4  
5 
6 
7 

Extracted data  
Publication title 
Author names 
Abstract  
Publication year  
Type of the publication 
Keywords 
Citation 

Table 1: Data items extracted from the literature 

After collecting the data from the publications, natural language processing (NLP) techniques are used on the title, 
the  abstract  and  the  keywords  to  reach  some knowledge  from  the  extracted  data.  NLP methods  should be  able  to 

 
  
Sahlab et.al/ Preprint 

 5 

extract the field of application of the literature and some entities or keywords related to the publication. The results 
are then stored in CSVs which are then used to build a KG based on a pre-defined meta-model. 

Using NLP, data is arranged and unnecessary text that is not important in the analysis such as subject pronouns, 
prepositions, math operators and equations and other special characters like “§”, “%”, “/”, etc. is removed. After this 
process, a clean text which is ready to be analyzed is obtained. The next step is the classification of the publication 
and extraction of entities based on pre-trained deep learning models.    

3.3. Knowledge Graph Metamodeling 

The knowledge graph meta-model is designed based on schema-based design. In order to use schema-based design, 
a specific model should be designed with no ambiguities. 
Fig. 2 shows the visualization of the expected knowledge graph with appropriate nodes and edges. Here, a labelled 
property graph (LPG) is used, consisting of labelled nodes and edges. LPGs have the advantages of assigning key-
value properties to both nodes and edges, which can be helpful later on in analysing the graph by weighing edges 
and further categorizing nodes by labels.  
As shown, the data extracted from the publications are stored in nodes and relationships are created to connect each 
node with each other. Each node stores certain information as discussed below: 

•  Publication node: this node stores information related to the publication such as:  

o  Name of the authors 
o  The abstract 
o  The title 
o  The URL 
o  Keywords  

•  Year of publication node: the year that the publication published in is stored in this node.  
•  Database node:  this node stores the database that publishes the publication. The label of this node should be 

one of the five databases mentioned before. 

•  Citation node: the number of citations that the literature was cited is stored in this node 
•  Related keywords node: it stores the entities that are related to the publication. 
•  Field of application node: the scope of the publication is stored in this node. 

Figure 2: KG meta-model 

 
 
 
 
 
6 

3.4. Analysis  

Sahlab et.al/Preprint 

3.4.1. Designing the queries to analyze the extracted publications 

After building the KG, queries should be implemented to gain insights about each publication as well as analyze 

publications from different views. 
Here, two different types of generic queries were designed.  
The pre-designed queries allow the user to cluster the KG by: 

•  The field of application or scope each publication considers 
•  The year that the literature is published in 
•  The database where the literature is published 

Furthermore,  the  application also  allows  the  user  to  design  his/her own  queries  to further  analyze  the  KG.  For 

example, sorting publications based on the number of citations or searching for specific authors.  

3.4.2. Knowledge Graph Update 

Knowledge Graphs have numerous advantages as they are dynamic and have the ability to change according to the 
change in the data. They are also expandable and updatable which make them very efficient in showing new entries 
and drawing relationships between the new and the old data that are already existing [12, 13].  

This work also considers the importance of expandability of the KG. Whenever the user triggers new search, the 

already existing KG will be updated and expanded automatically which in turn makes it very efficient.  

4. Realization 

4.1. Workflow 

In this section, the components of the prototype to automate a systematic literature review using knowledge graphs 
is discussed. As shown in Fig.3, the first step is to collect publications from different databases such as IEEExplore, 
Springer link, Wiley, ACM and ScienceDirect. In order to collect the publication from databases and extract useful 
data from them, python libraries are used to automate this process. Then, the extracted data are stored in CSVs to 
help  building  a  knowledge  graph  in  the  graph-database  neo4j.  Using  the  graph  query  cypher  language,  graph 
queries were designed.  

 
 
 
 
Sahlab et.al/ Preprint 

 7 

4.1.2 Front-end design of the Web-Application 

Figure 3: Workflow 

A Web-Application was realized to facilitate the search and visualization of the SLR. The Web-Application takes in 
the search keywords and presents the user with the knowledge graph, which is saved in the graph-database. The 
Web-Application consists of text boxes to specify the search terms as well as the exclusion criteria such as 
specifying the range of the years and/or using logic operators to include certain publications. Fig. 4 shows a 
screenshot of the front-end. 

4.2. Use Case 

Figure 4 Front-end web application 

As  a  proof  of  concept,  the  Web-Application  is  used  to  conduct  an  SLR  in  the  field  of  context-awareness  in 
automation  systems.  The  research  questions  for  the  SLR  aimed  at  investigating  context  modeling  and  reasoning 
approaches as well as classify application fields within the automation technology, where context-aware systems were 
applied. The review considered publications of the past five years. Fig.5 shows the front-end when the user specifies 
his search terms to be “context-awareness AND automation systems” and the year range to be from 2016 to 2022. 

Figure 5: search keywords for the use case 

 
 
 
 
 
 
8 

Sahlab et.al/Preprint 

4.2.1. Capturing the results of the SLR using KG automatically 

Fig.6 shows how one publication node and its relationship with other nodes should look like. While Fig.7 shows a 
part of the KG.  

      Figure 6: One publication 

                            Figure 7: Part of the KG 

4.2.2. Evaluation 

A manual SLR was conducted on context awareness in automation systems prior to using the realized prototype. 

The results of the manual SLR were then used as a benchmark to test the accuracy of the automated SLR.  

The comparison of the manual and automatic search shows a high accuracy and filtering of unsuitable publications. 
Automatic SLR managed to extract 78% of the publications that are resulting from manual SLR. The accuracy of the 
classified  publications  using  automatic  SLR  is  about  90%  similar  to  manual  SLR.  Moreover,  both  manual  and 
automatic SLR enable the same conclusion about prominent context modelling and reasoning approaches that are used 
within the publications in the past 5 years and in which field of application within automation systems. 

 Overall, a total of 212 publications were acquired and filtered from a total of  36973 publications found via the 
search engines of the five databases. A manual filtration yielded a total of 153 publications considered. The manual 
SLR, which included quality assessment criteria, considered 52 publications in total. Table 2 sows a summary of the 
extracted data using automated SLR. 

No.   Database 

After 
Search  

After 
Inclusion/Exclusion  

Accuracy of the automated SLR with respect to manual 
SLR (benchmark) 
Extracted  publications 
similarity 

Classifying  the  publications 
using NLP  

IEEEXplore  

DB1 
DB2  Springer Link  
DB3  Science Direct  
DB4  ACM  
DB5  Wiley  

TOTAL 

6798 
9634 
8825 
9726 
1990 

45 
53 
29 
17 
9 
153 

57% 
92% 
64% 
90% 
100% 
78% 

Table 2 Summary of the extracted data using automated SLR 

89% 
91% 
100% 
78% 
100% 
90% 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sahlab et.al/ Preprint 

 9 

5. Summary and Conclusions 

In this contribution, an approach for automating the data acquisition step of a Systematic Literature Review and 
presenting the results as a connected knowledge graph was presented. The proposed approach automates the initial 
steps  for  searching  for  relevant  publications,  while  considering  inclusion  and  exclusion  criteria  specific  to  the 
individual research scope. Through querying mechanisms, synthesizing results showing relations and similarities are 
possible with the proposed queries and key-word extraction mechanism. The automatic assessment via APIs enables 
researchers to initiate an update on the existing literature review results and can accumulate and analyze the results 
based on a larger period of time without the effort needed for the classical approach. The designed knowledge graph 
can be used for peer-assessment and enables a multimodal view on the extracted results for making a general statement 
about the research topic. A detailed analysis of each publication can further enhance the knowledge graph with inferred 
knowledge, for example, by weighing the edges or applying distance-based, co-occurrence and similarity measures.  
The prototype is being optimized and enhanced by testing it for further use cases to enable a generalized use across 

different research domains.  

6. References 

[1]  B. Kitchenham, O. Pearl Brereton, D. Budgen, M. Turner, J. Bailey, and S. Linkman, “Systematic literature 

reviews in software engineering – A systematic literature review,” Information and Software Technology, vol. 
51, no. 1, pp. 7–15, 2009, doi: 10.1016/j.infsof.2008.09.009. 

[2]  M. J. Page et al., “The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews,” BMJ 

(Clinical research ed.), vol. 372, n71, 2021, doi: 10.1136/bmj.n71. 

[3]  Connected Papers, https://www.connectedpapers.com/ (accessed: Apr. 25 2022). 
[4]  C. Deng et al., “GAKG: A Multimodal Geoscience Academic Knowledge Graph,” in Proceedings of the 30th 
ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management, Virtual Event Queensland 
Australia, 2021, pp. 4445–4454. 

[5]  Y. Xiao and M. Watson, “Guidance on Conducting a Systematic Literature Review,” Journal of Planning 

Education and Research, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 93–112, 2019, doi: 10.1177/0739456X17723971. 

[6]  P. Brereton, B. A. Kitchenham, D. Budgen, M. Turner, and M. Khalil, “Lessons from applying the systematic 
literature review process within the software engineering domain,” Journal of Systems and Software, vol. 80, 
no. 4, pp. 571–583, 2007, doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2006.07.009. 

[7]  Acemap Inc., GAKG: Multimodal Geoscience Academic Knowledge Graph. [Online]. Available: https://

gakg.acemap.info/#/ (accessed: Apr. 25 2022). 

[8]  N. J. van Eck and L. Waltman, “Visualizing Bibliometric Networks,” in Measuring Scholarly Impact: 
Methods and Practice, Y. Ding, R. Rousseau, and D. Wolfram, Eds., Cham, s.l.: Springer International 
Publishing, 2014, pp. 285–320. 

[9]    Mauro Dalle Lucca Tosi, Julio Cesar dos Reis, SciKGraph: A knowledge graph approach to structure a 

scientific field, Journal of Informetrics, Volume 15, Issue 1, 2021, 101109, ISSN 1751-
1577,https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joi.2020.101109. 

 [10] Fathalla, S., Vahdati, S., Auer, S., Lange, C. (2017). Towards a Knowledge Graph Representing Research 

Findings by Semantifying Survey Articles. In: Kamps, J., Tsakonas, G., Manolopoulos, Y., Iliadis, L., Karydis, 
I. (eds) Research and Advanced Technology for Digital Libraries. TPDL 2017. Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science(), vol 10450. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-67008-9_25 

[11]  K. Mattick, J. Johnston, and A. de La Croix, “How to…write a good research question,” The clinical teacher, 

vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 104–108, 2018, doi: 10.1111/tct.12776. 

[12]  Industry-scale knowledge graphs: lessons and challenges, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://dl.acm.org/doi/

fullhtml/10.1145/3331166 

[13]  A. Hogan et al., Knowledge Graphs: ACM Comput. Surv. 54, 4, Article 71 (May 2022), 37 pages. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3447772 

 
 
 
 
 
