Accurate uncertainty estimation in crowded ﬁelds: adaptive
optics and speckle data

E. Gallego-Canoa, R. Sch¨odela, A. T. Gallego-Calventea, and A. M. Ghezb

aInstituto de Astrof´ısica de Andaluc´ıa (CSIC), Glorieta de la Astronom´ıa s/n, 18008 Granada,
Spain
bUCLA, Department of Physics and Astronomy, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA

ABSTRACT

Optimal error estimation is key to achieve accurate photometry and astrometry. Stellar ﬂuxes and positions in
high angular resolution images are typically measured with PSF ﬁtting routines, such as StarFinder. However,
the formal uncertainties computed by these software packages tend to seriously underestimate the relevant
uncertainties. We present a new approach to deal with this problem using a resampling method to obtain robust
and reliable uncertainties without loss of sensitivity.

Keywords: Galactic Center, Astrometry, Photometry,Adaptive Optics, uncertainty, error analysis

1. INTRODUCTION

In order to obtain the photometry and astrometry of crowded stellar ﬁelds, we can use diﬀerent Point Spread
Function (PSF) ﬁtting routines. In the present work, we use StarFinder 1 to analyse two diﬀerent data sets:
adaptive optics (AO) and speckle data. Although the program gives a reliable detection of the point sources and
determination of their position and ﬂux, their formal uncertainties are underestimated. Therefore we want to
look into other methods to obtain realistic uncertainties.

The Galactic Centre (GC) is a good example to study crowded ﬁelds. Obtaining sensitive, high-angular
resolution photometry and astrometry is mandatory to study it, due its unique observational challenges, such as
high extinction and extreme stellar crowding. We are interested specially in the inner region around the super
massive black hole, Sagittarius A* (Sgr A*). This region is the most crowded region in the GC, therefore it is
imperative to push the angular resolution to the limit and to estimate realistic uncertainties to obtain accurate
photometry and astrometry.

There are many diﬀerent methods for error estimation. Here, we study the bootstrapping2, 3 resampling
method. The bootstrapping method uses ”N” measurements (in our case ”N” frames in one epoch) in order to
create diﬀerent data sets (in our case, diﬀerent images). Moreover, the bootstrap samples are produced with
replacement, which means that the same data point, can occur multiple times in our bootstrap sample. The main
advantage is that the bootstrap method assume that the measured data sample itself contains the information
about its error distribution.

We compare three methods for uncertainty estimation. In the ﬁrst method we apply the StarFinder (SF)
code to a deep image with the full data set and use the formal uncertainties from the program. In the second
method we separate the data into three independent sets with 1/3 of the frames each, create three images
and analyse them with SF, obtaining the uncertainties from the error of the mean of each star. Method three
consists of producing 100 deep images via bootstrapping, with the uncertainties derived from the distribution of
the StarFinder measurements on each of them. We compare the diﬀerent methods and study their advantages
and disadvantages. With the purpose of building a generic procedure to deal with diﬀerent data sets, we apply
the three methods to AO and speckle data, respectively. This article aims at addressing a process to get robust
and reliable uncertainties.

E. Gallego-Cano: E-mail: lgc@iaa.es

2
2
0
2

g
u
A
0
1

]

M

I
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
3
8
4
5
0
.
8
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
2. OBSERVATIONS AND DATA REDUCTION

On the one hand, we use Ks-band data from 08-09-2012 obtained with the S27 camera (0.027” pixel scale) on
NACO/VLT. The AO was locked on the NIR (near-infrared) bright supergiant GCIRS 7 that is located about
5.5” north of Sgr A*. The details of the observation are: λcentral = 2.18 µm, ∆λ = 0.35 µm, the number of
dithered expose (N) is 8, the number of integrations that were averaged on-line by the read-out electronics
(NDIT) is 60 and the detected integral time (DIT) is one second. The total integration time of each observation
amounts to 480 seconds (N×NDIT×DIT). We want to analyse the most crowded region around Sagittarius A*.
For this purpose, we consider the inner part with a ﬁeld of view of 10” × 10” centered in the black hole (See
Fig. 1, on the left). We have 1920 frames for the epoch.

Figure 1.
Imaging data used in the analysis. Left: AO SSA image from 9th August 2008 obtained with NACO/VLT.
The ﬁeld-of-view is 10” × 10” centered in Sg A*. Right: Speckle holography image from 23th May 2002 obtained with
NIRC/Keck. The ﬁeld-of-view is 5” × 5” centered in Sg A*.

The data and their reduction are presented in Gallego-Cano et al. (2017).4 The main diﬀerence to the cited
work is that here we create a large number of bootstrap samples to which we then apply the simple shift-and-add
(SSA) procedure to obtain ﬁnal images, as we see in section 3.

On the other hand, we use K-band data from 04-23-2002 obtained with NIRC (0.02” pixel scale and λcentral
= 2.2 µm) on the W. M. Keck I telescope. During the epoch of observation, 13440 frames were obtained using
very short exposure times (0.1 s) to freeze the distorting eﬀects of the Earth’s atmosphere. We apply a new
improved version of holographic reconstruction technique5, 6 to obtain a higher-quality, deeper ﬁnal image. The
ﬁeld of view in this case is 5” × 5” centered in the black hole(See Fig. 1, on the right). We have 11834 frames
for the epoch.

The reduction of the speckle data is explained in detail in diﬀerent papers.5, 7, 8 Our version of the speckle
holography technique is based on iteratively improved extraction of the instantaneous PSF from speckle frames
and on the optional simultaneous use of multiple reference stars. The algorithm has been speciﬁcally developed
for crowded ﬁelds. In this case, we use an improved version where we use of multiple reference stars to extract
the instantaneous PSF from the individual speckle frames, improve the alignment of the speckle frames before
the holo procedure, use a quadratic interpolation with a rebinning factor of two, estimate and subtract of a
variable sky from each frames and improve the secondary star subtraction of a variable sky from each frame. We
obtain a higher-quality, deeper ﬁnal image.

10”(0,4 pc)5”(0,2 pc)3. ASTROMETRY AND PHOTOMETRY

In this section we explain the diﬀerent methods that we tested to obtain the astrometry and photometry of the
detected stars as well as the associated astrometric and photometric uncertainties. Fig. 2 shows an outline of
the procedure that we followed after the basic reduction for each method.

Figure 2.
Scheme of the diﬀerent methods that we used to obtain the photometric and astrometric uncertainties.
For AO, in method 1 we obtained a co-added image with the full data set, run StarFinder on the image and used
the formal uncertainties from StarFinder.
In method 2 we created three separate data sets with 1/3 of the frames
each, created co-added images and analysed them with StarFinder. Finally we obtained realistic uncertainties from
independent data obtained from the error of the mean of each star.
In method 3 we created 100 bootstrap samples
and corresponding co-added images, run SF on each bootstrapped images and computed the uncertainties from standard
deviation of measurements of each star. For speckle data the procedure is the same, but we created co-added images not
from samples of individual frames, but from samples of holographically reduced batches of speckle frames.

3.1 AO data

3.1.1 Method 1

First, a simple SSA procedure was applied to obtain the ﬁnal deep image considering all the frames in the
epoch. After that, we used the SF program to detect and subtract detected point sources from the image.
We are interested in studying the resulting uncertainties of real stars and we want to avoid the possible con-
tamination of spurious sources, hence we used the following conservative values for the StarFinder parameters:
min correlation= 0.80 and deblend= 0. The detection threshold was chosen as 3σ and we applied two iteration of
SF algorithm. The photometry was calibrated with the stars IRS 16C,IRS 16NW, and IRS 33N (apparent mag-
nitudes Ks = 9.93, 10.14, 11.20 see9). In Fig. 3 we show the photometric and astrometric uncertainties obtained
along with the Ks-luminosity function (KLF). We detected 1618 stars and the detection limit, that we deﬁne
as the value of the magnitude where the cumulative number of all detected stars reached 90%, is 19.97. The
median value of the photometric uncertainty for brighter stars (Ks < 14)is 0.002.

3.1.2 Method 2

First, we divided the full data in 3 separate data sets with 1/3 of frames each. A simple SSA procedure was applied
to each subset to obtain three ﬁnal images. After that, we used the StarFinder program to detect and subtract
detected point sources from the three images. We used the same values for the StarFinder parameters than for
method 1. We compared detected stars in the three subset and considered the common stars. We calibrated
the images similar to method 1, but in this case we corrected the oﬀset in the positions and zero points that

Error estimationMethod 1Deep image!(from all data)3 subset images!(from 1/3 of the data each)Method 2Method 3nsamples deep images!(N…100…1000)Deep image!(from all data)Figure 3. Results obtained applying method 1 to AO data. a) Photometric uncertainties versus Ks magnitude from
Starﬁnder program. b) Astrometric uncertainties versus Ks magnitude from Starﬁnder program. We represent sqrt(dx2 +
dy2) versus Ks, where dx and dy are the errors in the x-position and y-position, respectively, of each star. c) KLF for the
deep image.

we could have due to small diﬀerences between their estimated PSFs. Finally, we computed uncertainties from
the error of the mean of the position and ﬂux of each star. In Fig. 4 we show the photometric and astrometric
uncertainties obtained from Starﬁnder and the KLF. We detected 1032 common stars and the detection limit is
18. The median value of the photometric uncertainty for brighter stars with Ks < 14 is 0.005.

Figure 4. Results obtained applying method 2 to AO data. a) Photometric uncertainties versus Ks magnitude from the
errors of the mean of each star detected in all images. b) Astrometric uncertainties versus Ks magnitude c) KLF for the
stars common to all images.

3.1.3 Method 3

First, we created 100 SSA images using the bootstrapping with replacement method. The number of frames
considered in each bootstrap image is equal to the total number of frames. After that, we used the SF program
to detect and subtract detected point sources from 100 bootstrap images. We used the same values for the SF
parameters than for the previous methods. We deﬁned the detection frequency parameter as the percentage of
bootstrap deep images where each star is detected and we obtained a ﬁnal list with all the stars detected in all
the images and their associated detection frequency value. We selected detection frequency=50%, which means

a)b)c)A0a)b)c)A0that we considered stars detected in 50% or more of the bootstrap images. We calibrated the images similar to
method 2, correcting the oﬀset in the positions and zero points that we could have between all the images, too.
Finally, we computed uncertainties from the standard deviation of the position and ﬂux of each star. In Fig. 5
we show the photometric and astrometric uncertainties obtained with this method and the KLF. We detected
1514 stars and the detection limit is 19. The median value of the photometric uncertainty for brighter stars with
Ks < 14 is 0.002.

Figure 5. Results obtained applying method 3 to AO data for detection frequency=50%. a) Photometric uncertainties
versus Ks magnitude from the standard deviation of the measurements of each star. b) Astrometric uncertainties versus
Ks magnitude. c) KLF for the ﬁnal list.

3.2 Speckle data
The procedure that we followed is the same than for AO data. The only diﬀerence is that in this case we ﬁrst
run holography on independent subsamples of the speckle frames and we combined the resulting holographic
images, as we see in Section 2.

3.2.1 Method 1

In this case, due to the small ﬁeld of NIRC, we study the central 5” around Sgr A*. We used the following values
for the SF parameters: min correlation= 0.80 and deblend= 1. The other SF parameters are the same than
for the AO data. The photometry was calibrated with the stars IRS 16C, IRS 16NW, and IRS 16CC (apparent
magnitudes K = 9.83, 10.03, 10.36 see10).
In Fig. 6 we show the photometric and astrometric uncertainties
obtained and the K-luminosity function (KLF). We detected 741 stars and the detection limit is 18. The median
value of the photometric uncertainty for brighter stars (Ks < 14) is 0.005.

3.2.2 Method 2

After the holographic procedure, we obtained 76 holo images. The procedure is the same than for AO data (see
section 3.1.2). We used the same values for the StarFinder parameters than for Method 1. Finally, we computed
uncertainties from the error of the mean of the position and ﬂux of each star. In Fig. 7 we show the photometric
and astrometric uncertainties obtained from Starﬁnder and the KLF. We detected 200 common stars and the
detection limit is 16. The median value of the photometric uncertainty for brighter stars with Ks < 14 is 0.06.

3.2.3 Method 3

In this case, we carry out a bootstrapping resampling method similar to AO (see section 3.1.3). The only
diﬀerence is that now we bootstrap holographically pre-reduced images and not bootstrap individual frames, as
in the AO case, with the aim of speed up the process. We use the same values for the StarFinder parameters that
for Method 1 and 2. We select detection frequency=50%. In Fig. 8 we show the photometric and astrometric
uncertainties obtained with this method and the KLF. We detect 457 stars and the detection limit is 17.05. The
median value of the photometric uncertainty for brighter stars with Ks < 14 is 0.06.

a)b)c)Figure 6. Results obtained applying method 1 to speckle data. a) Photometric uncertainties versus K magnitude from
Starﬁnder program. b) Astrometric uncertainties versus K magnitude from Starﬁnder program. c) KLF for the deep
image.

Figure 7. Results obtained applying method 2 to speckle data. a) Photometric uncertainties versus K magnitude from
the errors of the mean of each star detected in all images. b) Astrometric uncertainties versus K magnitude. c) KLF for
the common stars to all images.

4. DISCUSSION

In this section, we compare the results obtained by the three methods. Fig. 9 and Fig. 10 show the comparison
between the diﬀerent methods for AO data and speckle data, respectively.
If we compare the uncertainties
obtained by method 2 with the uncertainties obtained by method 1, we can see that StarFinder under-estimates
the uncertainties (see a in Fig. 9 and Fig. 10). If we compare the results obtained by the method 2 and method
3, we can see that we obtain similar uncertainties (see b in Fig. 9 and Fig. 10). Therefore, we can get statistically
similar uncertainties by both method 2 and 3.

a)b)c)Specklea)b)c)SpeckleFigure 8. Results obtained applying method 3 to speckle data for detection frequency=50%. a) Photometric uncertainties
versus K magnitude from the standard deviation of the measurements of each star. b) Astrometric uncertainties versus
K magnitude. c) KLF for the ﬁnal list.

Figure 9. Final comparison between the three methods for AO. a) Comparison between the photometric uncertainties
obtained by method 1 (green) and method 2 (black). b) Comparison between the photometric uncertainties obtained by
method 2 (black) and method 3 (blue).c) Distributions of errors obtained by method 2 (yellow) and method 3 (green).

Figure 10. Final comparison between the three methods for speckle. a) Comparison between the photometric uncertainties
obtained by method 1 (green) and method 2 (black). b) Comparison between the photometric uncertainties obtained by
method 2 (black) and method 3 (blue).c) Distributions of errors obtained by method 2 (yellow) and method 3 (green).

a)b)c)Specklelog(dKs)a)b)c)a)b)c)Specklelog(dKs)The Fig. 11) compare KLFs obtained by method 2 and 3, respectively. We can see that although both
methods give reliable uncertainties, we can go almost one magnitude deeper by applying the bootstrapping
procedure than by applying method 2.

Figure 11. Comparison between KLFs obtained by method 2 and 3 for AO data(on the left) and for speckle data(on the
right). Both give robust uncertainty estimates, but method 3 is more sensitive.

5. CONCLUSIONS

In this article, we show three methods to obtain uncertainties. We see that StarFinder under-estimates the
uncertainties. We obtain robust uncertainty estimates by separating the data into disjunct subsets, but at the
cost of loss of sensitivity. We show a new method that uses bootstrapping resampling approach. This method
allows us to obtain robust estimates of the uncertainty and is more sensitive than method 2.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The research leading to these results has received funding from the European Research Council under the
European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) / ERC grant agreement n◦ [614922]. This
work is based on observations made with ESO Telescopes at the La Silla Paranal Observatory under programm
ID089.B-0162.

REFERENCES

[1] Diolaiti, E., Bendinelli, O., Bonaccini, D., Close, L., Currie, D., and Parmeggiani, G., “Analysis of isoplanatic
high resolution stellar ﬁelds by the starﬁnder code,” Astronomy and Astrophysics Supplement Series 147(2),
335–346 (2000).

[2] Andrae, R., “Error estimation in astronomy: A guide,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1009.2755 (2010).
[3] Efron, B., “Bootstrap methods: another look at the jackknife annals of statistics 7: 1–26,” View Article

PubMed/NCBI Google Scholar 24 (1979).

[4] Gallego-Cano, E., Sch¨odel, R., Dong, H., Nogueras-Lara, F., Gallego-Calvente, A., Amaro-Seoane, P., and
Baumgardt, H., “The distribution of stars around the milky way’s central black hole-i. deep star counts,”
Astronomy & Astrophysics 609, A26 (2018).

[5] Sch¨odel, R., Yelda, S., Ghez, A., Girard, J., Labadie, L., Rebolo, R., P´erez-Garrido, A., and Morris, M.,
“Holographic imaging of crowded ﬁelds: high angular resolution imaging with excellent quality at very low
cost,” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 429(2), 1367–1375 (2013).

[6] Sch¨odel, R. and Girard, J. H., “Holographic imaging: A versatile tool for high angular resolution imaging,”

The Messenger 150, 26–29 (2012).

[7] Boehle, A., Ghez, A., Sch¨odel, R., Meyer, L., Yelda, S., Albers, S., Martinez, G., Becklin, E., Do, T.,
Lu, J., et al., “An improved distance and mass estimate for sgr a* from a multistar orbit analysis,” The
Astrophysical Journal 830(1), 17 (2016).

[8] Meyer, L., Ghez, A., Sch¨odel, R., Yelda, S., Boehle, A., Lu, J., Do, T., Morris, M., Becklin, E., and
Matthews, K., “The shortest-known–period star orbiting our galaxy’s supermassive black hole,” Sci-
ence 338(6103), 84–87 (2012).

[9] Sch¨odel, R., Najarro, F., Muzic, K., and Eckart, A., “Peering through the veil: near-infrared photometry
and extinction for the galactic nuclear star cluster-accurate near infrared h, ks, and l’photometry and the
near-infrared extinction-law toward the central parsec of the galaxy,” Astronomy & Astrophysics 511, A18
(2010).

[10] Blum, R., Sellgren, K., and DePoy, D., “Jhkl photometry and the k-band luminosity function at the galactic

center,” arXiv preprint astro-ph/9604109 (1996).

