2
2
0
2

g
u
A
6
1

]

M

I
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
7
3
9
7
0
.
8
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Liger at Keck Observatory: Design of the Data Reduction
System and Software Interfaces

Nils Rundquista,b, Andrea Zoncaf, Arun Suryac, Shelley A. Wrighta,b, Aaron Browna,b, Maren
Cosensa,b, Michael Fitzgeraldd, Chris Johnsond, Marc Kassisg, Renate Kupkeh, Kyle Lanclosg,
James E. Larkind, Kenneth Magnoned, Rosalie McGurkg, Ji Man Sohnd, Gregory Walthe,
James Wileya,b, Sherry Yehg
a Center for Astrophysics & Space Sciences, University of California San Diego, USA;
b Department of Physics, University of California San Diego, USA;
c Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai, India
d Physics & Astronomy Department, University of California Los Angeles, CA 90095 USA;
e Carnegie Observatories, 813 Santa Barbara St, Pasadena, CA 91101 USA
f San Diego Supercomputer Center, University of California San Diego, USA;
g W.M. Keck Observatory, 65-1120 Mamalahoa Hwy, Waimea, HI, USA;
h Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, University of California Santa Cruz, USA;

ABSTRACT

Liger is a second generation near-infrared imager and integral ﬁeld spectrograph (IFS) for the W. M. Keck
Observatory that will utilize the capabilities of the Keck All-sky Precision Adaptive-optics (KAPA) system.
Liger operates at a wavelength range of 0.81 µm - 2.45 µm and utilizes a slicer and a lenslet array IFS with
varying spatial plate scales and ﬁelds of view resulting in hundreds of modes available to the astronomer. Because
of the high level of complexity in the raw data formats for the slicer and lenslet IFS modes, Liger must be designed
in conjunction with a Data Reduction System (DRS) which will reduce data from the instrument in real-time
and deliver science-ready data products to the observer. The DRS will reduce raw imager and IFS frames from
the readout system and provide 2D and 3D data products via custom quick-look visualization tools suited to the
presentation of IFS data. The DRS will provide the reduced data to the Keck Observatory Archive (KOA) and
will be available to astronomers for oﬄine post-processing of observer data. We present an initial design for the
DRS and deﬁne the interfaces between observatory and instrument software systems.

Keywords: infrared:imaging, data:simulator, instrumentation: near-infrared, imaging:photometric, Keck Ob-
servatory, Keck All-sky Precision Adaptive optics

1. INTRODUCTION

The largest of all cat species is a hybrid animal of lion and a tiger, and so named for its similarly hybrid design
inheriting aspects of predecessor instruments InfraRed Imaging Spectrograph (IRIS)1–4 and OH-Suppressing
InfraRed Imaging Spectrograph (OSIRIS), Liger5, 6 is a second generation near-infrared imager and integral
ﬁeld spectrograph (IFS) for W. M. Keck Observatory (WMKO). Liger is designed to provide exceptional utility
in accessing the new observational opportunities oﬀered by the new Keck All-sky Precision Adaptive-optics
(KAPA)7 system. Liger operates in the 0.81 µm - 2.45 µm wavelength range, and utilizes slicer and lenslet
array IFS designs to oﬀer various plate scales and ﬁelds of view for the spectrograph in addition to its imaging
camera.6, 8–10 The Liger imager oﬀers a 20.5”x 20.5”Field of View (FoV) at a plate scale of 10 miliarcseconds
(mas), and is designed to operate concurrently with the IFS. The IFS mode plate scales range from 15 mas
to 150 mas with spectral resolution options ranging from 4,000 to 10,000 and a large ﬁeld of view range. The
operational modes are shown in Table 1.

Further author information: (Send correspondence to N.R.)

N.R...: E-mail: nrundqui@physics.ucsd.edu

 
 
 
 
 
 
Mode

Imager
Lenslet IFS

Spatial
Elements

128 x 128

16 x 128

Slicer IFS

Spatial
Elements

88 x 45

44 x 45

Table 1. Operational modes overview of Liger.
Field
of View
20.5”x20.5”

Spatial
Sampling
10 mas

Spectral
Resolution (R)
Set By Filter

Wavelength
Bandpass
5%, 20%, 40%

15 mas
31 mas
15 mas
31 mas

75 mas
150 mas
75 mas
150 mas

1.9”x1.9”
3.9”x3.9”
0.2”x1.9”
0.5”x3.9”

6.6”x3.4”
13.2”x6.8”
3.3”x3.4”
6.6”x6.8”

4000

5%

4000, 8000, 10000

5%, 20%, 40%

4000

5%, 20%

4000, 8000, 10000

5%, 20%, 40%

1.1 Motivation for the Data Reduction System

Liger is an important development in instruments for observational astronomy; through oﬀering unique science
capabilities at high spectral and spatial resolution many novel avenues of research are made available.6 Liger’s
complex optical design6, 8–10 demands the need for a robust Data Reduction System (DRS) in order to provide
usable science data products for Liger’s wide variety of operational modes. The complexity of IFS data products
in particular necessitates advanced processing of the raw detector data into three-dimensional (X, Y, λ) data
cubes usable by astronomers. Exemplifying this, we generate simulated raw data frames for the Liger slicer
and lenslet IFS modes for testing and development by utilizing and advancing from simulation code used for
IRIS and OSIRIS instruments.11–13 Illustration of the spectral layout, estimated spectral distributions across
the Hawaii-4RG detectors, and assembled 3D data cubes are presented in Figure 1.

The Liger DRS refers to all aspects of reducing data from the Liger detectors. This includes the processes
performed on the raw detector data outside the scope of the Data Reduction Pipeline (DRP) which is itself a
subset of the broader DRS. While these terms are sometimes used interchangeably, although the speciﬁc diﬀerence
is illustrated in Figure 3 and the primary focus of this paper is discussion of the DRP as done in Section 3.

Several other advanced instruments at WMKO have demonstrated the need for automated data reduction,
including NIRSPEC14, 15 and OSIRIS.16 In order to enable maximum versatility in science products, the reduced
science data, raw unprocessed frames, and calibration data will all be made available to astronomers through
the Keck Observatory Archive (KOA), as discussed in Section 2.1. Data products, algorithms, and other DRP
characteristics are discussed in Section 3.

1.2 Heritage from IRIS

One of the fundamental advantages that Liger possesses as an instrument is design inheritance from preceding
instruments, particularly IRIS, and the DRP is no exception. The DRP inherits its design directly from the
IRIS DRS,17–19 which itself leverages the Data Reduction System infrastructure from Space Telescope.20, 21 The
fundamental structure of the DRP design, like that of the IRIS Data Reduction System, is modeled after the
JWST ‘stpipe‘ package which deﬁnes a framework to implement all data reduction algorithms as individual steps,
combine them into pipelines, and then conﬁgure and execute them. The pipeline python package for Liger will
be called ’liger pipeline’ and mirrors the IRIS design inherited from Space Telescope. This system architecture
is further discussed in Section 3.

2. SOFTWARE ARCHITECTURE AT WMKO

Figure 3 illustrates the integration of DRS components into the Observatory software system. The readouts are
assembled into full “Raw Frames” on each of the detector computers, one for the imager and one for the IFS.
Each detector target computer acquires the readouts from the detector hardware and calls functions from the

Figure 1. Simulations of the Liger Slicer (above) and Liger Lenslet (below) spectral distribution across the IFS detector
(Left, Middle) and a 2D image slice of the reduced data cube following the reduction of the raw detector data (Right)
using the 150mas mode for the slicer, and the 15 mas mode for the lenslet in the Kbb ﬁlter. In order to accurately present
IFS data products raw detector frames must be processed and reduced by a robust data reduction software pipeline. The
simulated slicer ﬁeld consists of source brightness down to 23rd magnitude (Vega) over 20 sources, and the lenslet ﬁeld
consists of two sources. Liger performance was simulated with an integration time of 1 hour and 15 minutes.

Markury ASIC Control and Interface Electronics (MACIE) C library to perform low-level reduction algorithms
like sampling, and then saves to disk the raw science frame for further processing. The output data ﬁles are
saved in a shared high-capacity ﬁle system which resides on the pipeline computer. The DRS (and Liger software
generally) will utilize the Flexible Image Transport System (FITS)22 format for data products which will enable
easy and historically-motivated association of multiple data images via extensions and metadata via headers.
Although this is not currently planned, it would not be diﬃcult for the pipeline computer to retrieve additional
telemetry or other metadata as needed and this may be incorporated as ongoing development requires.

As soon as an observation starts, the Liger Pipeline will receive a command to prepare for execution and
will start to monitor the ﬁle system for raw science frame ﬁles to be available as soon as the Detector Target
computers write them. When a raw science frame is available on the disk, the DRP will conﬁgure the pipeline
execution based upon the available metadata and launch a ‘liger pipeline‘ process for each raw science frame.
Therefore multiple instances of the Python pipeline will run concurrently, which will be important to enable
simultaneous observation utilizing both IFS and imager modes.

The ‘liger pipeline‘ Python processes, once conﬁgured with the parameters for the current observing mode,
will process the input raw science frames into reduced science frames in less than 15 seconds for the imager,
30 seconds for the IFS, and will also read from the local storage disk to retrieve the necessary calibration ﬁles.
The suitable calibration ﬁles will be selected based on the pipeline conﬁguration and the observation metadata

retrieved from telemetry and the header of the raw frame. Once the pipelines have completed execution, they will
write the output FITS ﬁles to the DRP storage disk. At this point the DRS can publish the event of ”execution
completed” and the data products can be made available for quicklook visualization.

The diﬀerent computer systems allocated to handle the system processes illustrated in Figure 3 are each
catered the speciﬁc computational requirements of their respective functionalities. For the pipeline computer,
the currently budgeted speciﬁcations entail Dual Xeon Processors with 32 Gb RAM and 1+ Tb RAID-5 for
data storage. This should provide ample processing power and storage capabilities for the DRP requirements,
although the exact method of transfer or shared storage space enabling writing raw science frames from the
detector target computers to the pipeline computers is still to be determined as discussed in Section 2.1.

2.1 Software Interfaces at Observatory Level
Interfaces to subsystems at WMKO are managed through the Keck Task Library (KTL),23 which the instrument
host computer will utilize to sequence observations from astronomer-enabled scripts or commands from an ob-
servational planning graphical user interface. These sequences will be passed to the detector target computers,
which will clock the detectors. Metadata associated with the particular observation sequenced from the instru-
ment host computer will be associated with individual reads by the detector target computers after retrieval
from observatory systems (also via KTL’s keyword-associated metadata retrieval).

Liger software components are grouped using a logical bundle of keywords formed with one or more dis-
patchers. This approach is widely used amongst several successfully commissioned Keck instruments such as
NIRSPEC, OSIRIS, and MOSFIRE. There are six main services provided by Liger software: two Detector
Services (for the imager and spectrograph), Motion Control Service, Housekeeping Service, Power Service, and
Header Service. Each service has one or more dispatchers publishing keywords to KTL, mostly current status and
readings of the electronics and hardware for which each dispatcher is responsible. The exception is the Header
Service, which aggregates telemetries from other dispatchers to prepare for the FITS ﬁle header. Because this
paper is concerned primarily with the DRP, we will not further discuss the speciﬁcs of Liger software pertaining
to each of the listed Liger services.

Figure 2. Basic outline of the functionality provided by KTL and how Liger will interface with subsystems. Illustration
of individual subsystem interfaces is shown in Figure 3.

Besides the listed services with their respective dispatchers, several KTL client components are part of Liger
software as well: Graphic User Interface (GUI), Scripts, and Data Visualization. The GUI will be the main
interface to the users (astronomers and supporting staﬀ) while scripts can help automate some of the often used,
highly repeated processes to save time on observing nights.

Oﬄine reduction capabilities will be provided to the astronomer via access to the KOA24, 25 as illustrated in
Figure 3. The format for data products and associated metadata to be ingested by KOA for astronomer access
will be consistent with WMKO best practices for archival to enable clear deﬁnition and categorization.26, 27
Through KOA Keck astronomers will be able to download raw science frames, calibrations, and reduced data
products. The DRP code itself will be available for astronomer download and personalization via a github
repository.

Figure 3. Liger software and WMKO software architecture and interfaces. The diﬀerent computers to be used for hosting
Liger software are shown in boxes, with observatory and the reduction pipelines integrated into the observatory software
for online processing on site. Software packages are illustrated as the colored boxes, with color associated with coding
language and uncolored boxes associated with the external software of WMKO. The rough data ﬂow of a hypothetical
observation is shown through the sequence of arrows beginning from the instrument host computer.

3. DATA REDUCTION PIPELINE

The DRP is planned to provide real-time (< 1 minute) data processing of imaging and spectroscopic data, as
well as a full oﬄine reduction package. There will be three modes of the real-time data reductions on raw science
frames: imager, lenslet IFS, and slicer IFS data. The visualization method for Liger data products is yet to be
determined but will be compliant with WMKO software infrastructure and will take place on the instrument
host computer as illustrated in Figure 3. The Liger DRP software structure will be implemented as the raw data
frames (assembled from individual ramps read from each detector target computer) are delivered to the pipeline
computer from the detector target computers.

The architecture of the full DRP package will be a pipeline, the model used for many existing instruments.
In software, a pipeline is a chain of processing elements (i.e. algorithms) arranged so that the output of each
element is the input of the next. The DRP system will serve to link all the algorithms together and provide the
necessary software infrastructure. All Liger data reduction algorithms will be custom-designed for Liger ﬁnal
data products. The basis of some algorithms will be adapted from previous IFS instruments, such as OSIRIS,
GPI, NIFS, and SINFONI pipelines. Numerous near-infrared imagers exist (e.g. NIRC2, NACO), and they
will be leveraged to provide algorithms for the Imaging mode whenever possible. The DRP will be written in
Python to process data and metadata utilizing the FITS format. As discussed in Section 1.2, the structure of the
DRP is based on the JWST pipeline ’stpipe’, the beneﬁt of which is to provide a substantial infrastructure for
deﬁning diﬀerent reduction routines and enabling modularity in software design to improve overall functionality

and long-term support sustainability.

3.1 Motivation for STPIPE as Pipeline Architecture

Utilizing ’stpipe’ software architecture provides many beneﬁts and increases the eﬀectiveness of the DRP from a
software design perspective. In contrast to observatories or instruments which implement their own pipeline from
scratch, Liger (Like IRIS) will adopt the general-purpose modular design infrastructure already released by Space
Telescope and will not be encumbered by the need to ”reinvent the wheel” in the case of data reduction pipelines
by beginning from nothing. The modularity and astronomer-speciﬁc capabilities (such as to save data products
between any pipeline operation) which are well documented, supported, and tested by the Space Telescope
team allow the package to be easily adapted by Liger software development and to astronomers who will wish
to download the package and make alterations as necessary for their speciﬁc data reduction needs. As more
astronomers use JWST and become familiar with the pipeline associated with it, that familiarity will transfer
neatly over to both IRIS and Liger data reduction systems.

The risks involved with the adoption of ’stpipe’ as a software architecture primarily lie in the use of an
external software package for critical functions. Because of the extensive testing, commenting, and documen-
tation available for ’stpipe’ this risk is assessed as minimal and acceptable for the beneﬁts of adopting this as
infrastructure for the Liger DRP.

3.2 DRP Algorithms

The Liger pipeline will be comprised of a series of algorithms feeding the output of one as the input of the next
to perform the basic data processing techniques required of Liger data products. This section will provide a
description of the algorithms to be incorporated into the Liger DRP and describe the data ﬂow.

As discussed in Section 2.1, the Liger pipeline will be available for oﬄine data processing and reduced data
products will be available for visualization in real-time. However, because the processing time required for the
real-time reduction for visualization upon an observation night is time-sensitive, some of the steps of the IFS
and Imager pipelines are skipped during real-time reduction. Table 3.2 gives information on algorithms that
will be used in each of the oﬄine and real-time scenarios. There will be a separate ﬂow for the data processing
algorithms listed in Table 3.2 depending on the selected instrument mode. In keeping with design and algorithm
inheritance from IRIS DRS as discussed in Section 1.2, the categorization of these algorithms mirrors the IRIS
design presented in Walth et al (2018)17 excluding IRIS-speciﬁc algorithms. An illustration of the data ﬂow
within the Liger DRS and the diﬀerent algorithms used for each subsystem is illustrated in Figure 4.

Table 2. Algorithms used for the imager and IFS real-time and ﬁnal data pipelines.
Real-time Processing Oﬄine processing
Algorithms
Imager
x
x
x

IFS
x
x
x

Generate master dark
Dark subtraction
Correction of detector artifacts
Remove cosmic rays
Flat ﬁelding*
Spectral extraction
Wavelength calibration
Cube assembly
Scaled sky-subtraction
Telluric correction
Field distortion correction
Flux calibration
Mosaic/Combine science

x

x

x
x
x
x
x

Imager
x
x
x
x
x

x

x
x
x

IFS
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x
x

*IFS ﬂat ﬁelding algorithm is for slicer mode only.

Figure 4. Data ﬂow and processing within the Liger DRS. IFS and Imager reduction pipelines will be capable of running
concurrently (via parallelized processes) in order to reduce the processing time required for quick-look visualization on an
observation night in which both the IFS and Imager are used for a single observational sequence.

The Liger DRP is comprised of the sequence of algorithms illustrated in Figure 4, in addition to those that
generate the requisite calibration frames and metadata objects to be associated with a Liger data product. For
further data analysis and processing involving more speciﬁc reduction techniques beyond those here described,
the astronomer is expected to download the Liger DRP and any data products necessary for oﬄine processing
as discussed in Section 2.1.

3.2.1 Assign WCS

Each Liger observation will be associated with a World Coordinate System (WCS) object which will be generated
from the metadata associated with each observation. Not only is this crucial metadata for the scientiﬁc viability
of an observation, but this will be utilized for proper assembly of dithered frames as described in Section 3.2.10.

3.2.2 Generate Master Dark

Dark frames will be stored on the DRP storage disk with associated header metadata for cataloguing as calibration
frames. Upon reduction of science data these frames will be assembled into a master dark frame to be used in
dark current subtraction as discussed in Section 3.2.7.

3.2.3 Data Quality Flagging

Each frame supplied to the DRP will be analyzed to ascertain data quality. Data Quality (DQ) FITS extensions
will be appended to each frame in order to mark bad pixels and ﬂag other potential quality issues in the form of
a bad pixel map.

3.2.4 Detector Artifact and Bad Pixel Removal

Utilizing the FITS extensions discussed in Section 3.2.3, each frame will have detector artifacts and bad pixels
removed prior to full data reduction in order to preserve the quality of science data.

3.2.5 Cosmic Ray Removal

Cosmic rays are unpredictable high energy photons which may be observed from the sky and cause bright artifacts
to be read on the detector. In order to preserve science data quality, each frame will be ﬂagged for cosmic rays
and the aﬀected pixels will be removed from the frame.

3.2.6 Flat Fielding

Each science frame must be normalized to remove the detector variance in the ﬁeld across the image. In order to
accomplish this ﬂat ﬁeld calibration frames will be taken and stored on the DRP storage disk, and normalized
by dividing an input ﬂat frame by its median. This will then be used to scale the science and error extensions
in order to remove ﬁeld variance.

3.2.7 Dark Subtraction

Dark current is a consistent noise source in the form of observed current from infrared emission. Utilizing the
master dark generated as discussed in Section 3.2.2 to reduce the eﬀects of intrinsic photon noise, dark current
will be subtracted from the detector frames. If necessary to reduce the time impact of assembling the master
dark, for real-time reduction prior to data visualization on an observation night only a single dark frame will be
used to subtract dark current.

3.2.8 Scaled Sky Subtraction

The intrinsic brightness of the sky must be subtracted oﬀ of the science frame for optimal scientiﬁc viability.
For the imager, this can be accomplished through subtraction of a single constant value associated with the
integrated brightness of the sky for that bandwidth. For the IFS, a sky frame must be taken and scaled to match
the sky brightness of the science frame.

3.2.9 Flux Calibration

Frames from the detector are stored with pixel values in data units, with corresponding gain values which
associate the number of electrons per second per data unit. These electrons per second are each associated with
a certain number of photons per second observed from the sky. Each frame will therefore need to be converted
from data units into surface brightness units: ﬂux density erg/s/cm2/Hz for the imager and erg/s/cm2/˚A for
the IFS. This will be accomplished through observation of a standard star calibration.

3.2.10 Mosaic / Combine Frames

Observational frames that have been dithered need to be combined based on their relative positions. As discussed
in Section 3.2.1, this will be performed based on each frames WCS metadata in order to match the relative
locations of speciﬁc pixels. Both integer and non-integer numbers of pixel shifts will be supported, and either
median or averages of the overlapping ﬁeld regions will be allowed to combine dithered frames.

3.2.11 Distortion Correction

Correcting distortion of an imager frame is an essential duty of the Liger DRP. The DRP will utilize a pre-
assembled distortion solution to correct each observed imager ﬁeld of the instrument-speciﬁc aberrations aﬀecting
the frame.

3.2.12 Spectral Extraction

The spectral extraction of the IFS modes of Liger is one of the most important and potentially problematic
roles of the Liger DRP. For the Slicer, this will be comprised of a relatively straightforward extraction along
the locations of the spectra associated with each spatial element for the speciﬁed slicer mode. For the lenslet,
each spectra will need to be deconvolved in order to account for the spectral overlap with neighboring spectra
associated with diﬀerent spatial elements. The lenslet spectral extraction will require a rectiﬁcation matrix.
The importance and complexity of this operation is illustrated by the spectral distribution simulations shown in
Figure 1.

3.2.13 Wavelength Calibration

Proper calibration of the wavelength elements associated with each spectral element for the Liger IFS is a crucial
data reduction step for the lenslet and slicer data products. This will be conducted using data frames associated
with arc lamps containing typical emission lines for the near infrared such as argon, krypton, and xenon. These
frames will then be used to compute the wavelength solution for each spectrum, and apply it to the extracted
spectra discussed in Section 3.2.12.

3.2.14 Telluric Correction

Eﬀects of the Earth’s atmosphere are problematic for astronomical observation, and so removing the absorption
features (i.e. the telluric) of the Earth’s atmosphere is an important step of the Liger DRP. This will be done
through calibration from observation of a telluric A-type standard calibration star (e.g. Vega).

3.2.15 Cube Assembly

Following proper spectral extraction as discussed in Section 3.2.12 and calibration as discussed in Section 3.2.13,
IFS spectra must be assembled into 3D (X, Y, λ) data cubes to be delivered to the astronomer. The Liger
DRP will assemble the extracted and calibrated spectra in accordance with their individual spatially associated
elements into a data cube with WCS coordinates.

3.3 Data Products

The Liger DRP will deliver the following data products presented in this section to the astronomer and to the
KOA for archiving.

3.3.1 Raw Frames

As shown in Figure 3, the detector target computers will deliver all raw frames to the Liger DRP. The processing
algorithms described in Section 3.2 will take place, but the unprocessed 2D raw detector frames will also be
passed through the DRP to enable any oﬄine processing the astronomer desires.

3.3.2 2D Reduced Frames

The DRP will reduce the input frames from the detector target computers as described in Section 3.2. The
2D processed imager and calibration frames will then be passed to KOA for science frame availability and for
potential oﬄine additional processing by astronomer.

3.3.3 3D Data Cubes

IFS processed data products take the form of 3D (X, Y, λ) data cubes as discussed in Section 3.2.15. These are
then delivered by the DRP.

3.3.4 DQ Extensions

All detector frames will have associated data quality extensions, as discussed in Section 3.2.3. These will be
delivered with all FITS data products to illustrate potential quality issues with associated detector pixels.

3.3.5 Metadata

As illustrated by Figures 3 and 4 and discussed in Section 3.2, metadata will be used by the DRP to conduct
many necessary processes and will be associated with all Liger DRP data products in the form of FITS headers.
Telemetry, observatory, and instrument metadata will be delivered with every Liger data product to enable
optimal scientiﬁc viability for the groundbreaking astronomy that Liger will undoubtedly allow.

4. SUMMARY

Liger is an exciting new instrument for WMKO that is designed with heritage from IRIS and OSIRIS to fully
take advantage of the new KAPA AO system. As both an imager and integral ﬁeld spectrograph with hundreds
of potential modes, a robust data reduction pipeline is a necessary addition to the instrument software infrastruc-
ture. We have presented the initial design for the Liger DRS, utilizing stpipe as architecture and incorporating
the DRS into WMKO software. Development of the DRS is ongoing, and future iterations of its design will
further streamline the software interfaces and algorithms involved to ensure that optimally science-ready data
products be delivered upon Liger’s ﬁrst light.

This research program has been made possible by the Heising-Simons Foundation (Grant #2018-1085: Wright)
and the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation (Grant #11169: Wright).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

REFERENCES

[1] Larkin, J. E. and et al, “The Infrared Imaging Spectrograph (IRIS) for TMT: instrument overview,” in

[Ground-based and Airborne Instrumentation for Astronomy VII ], SPIE (July 2018).

[2] Larkin, J. E., Moore, A. M., Wright, S. A., Wincentsen, J. E., Anderson, D., Chisholm, E. M., Dekany,
R. G., Dunn, J. S., Ellerbroek, B. L., Hayano, Y., Phillips, A. C., Simard, L., Smith, R., Suzuki, R., Weber,
R. W., Weiss, J. L., and Zhang, K., “The Infrared Imaging Spectrograph (IRIS) for TMT: instrument
overview,” in [Ground-based and Airborne Instrumentation for Astronomy VI ], SPIE (August 2016).

[3] Moore, A. M., Larkin, J. E., Wright, S. A., Bauman, B., Dunn, J., Ellerbroek, B., Phillips, A. C., Simard,
L., Suzuki, R., Zhang, K., Aliado, T., Brims, G., Canﬁeld, J., Chen, S., Dekany, R., Delacroix, A., Do,
T., Herriot, G., Ikenoue, B., Johnson, C., Meyer, E., Obuchi, Y., Pazder, J., Reshetov, V., Riddle, R.,
Saito, S., Smith, R., Sohn, J. M., Uraguchi, F., Usuda, T., Wang, E., Wang, L., Weiss, J., and Wooﬀ, R.,
“The Infrared Imaging Spectrograph (IRIS) for TMT: instrument overview,” in [Ground-based and Airborne
Instrumentation for Astronomy V ], SPIE (August 2014).

[4] Larkin, J. E., Moore, A. M., Barton, E. J., Bauman, B., Bui, K., Canﬁeld, J., Crampton, D., Delacroix,
A., Fletcher, M., Hale, D., Loop, D., Niehaus, C., Phillips, A. C., Reshetov, V., Simard, L., Smith, R.,
Suzuki, R., Usuda, T., and Wright, S. A., “The Infrared Imaging Spectrograph (IRIS) for TMT: instrument
overview,” in [Ground-based and Airborne Instrumentation for Astronomy III ], SPIE (July 2010).

[5] Wiley, J., Mathur, K., Brown, A., Wright, S., Cosens, M., Maire, J., Fitzgerald, M., Jones, T., Kassis,
M., Kress, E., Kupke, R., Larkin, J. E., Lyke, J., Wang, E., and Yeh, S., “Liger for next-generation
Keck adaptive optics: opto-mechanical dewar for imaging camera and slicer,” in [Society of Photo-Optical
Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series ], Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers
(SPIE) Conference Series 11447, 1144758 (Dec. 2020).

[6] Wright, S. A., “Liger at Keck Observatory: Overall Design Speciﬁcations and Science Drivers,” in [Ground-

based and Airborne Instrumentation for Astronomy IX ], SPIE (July 2022).

[7] Wizinowich, P., Lu, J., and Cetre, S., “Keck All Sky Precision Adaptive Optics Program Overview,” in

[Ground-based and Airborne Instrumentation for Astronomy IX ], SPIE (July 2022).

[8] Cosens, M., Wright, S. A., Arriaga, P., Brown, A., Fitzgerald, M., Jones, T., Kassis, M., Kress, E., Kupke,
R., Larkin, J. E., Lyke, J., Wang, E., Wiley, J., and Yeh, S., “Liger for next-generation Keck AO: ﬁlter
wheel and pupil design,” in [Ground-based and Airborne Instrumentation for Astronomy VIII], Society of
Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series 11447, 114474X (Dec. 2020).

[9] Cosens, M., Wright, S. A., Brown, A., Fitzgerald, M., Johnson, C., Jones, T., Kassis, M., Kress, E., Kupke,
R., Larkin, J. E., Magnone, K., McGurk, R., Rundquist, N.-E., Sohn, J. M., Wang, E., Wiley, J., and Yeh,
S., “Liger at Keck Observatory: Imager Detector and IFS Pick-oﬀ Mirror Assembly,” in [Ground-based and
Airborne Instrumentation for Astronomy IX ], Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE)
Conference Series, SPIE (July 2022).

[10] Whiley, J., “Liger at Keck Observatory: Final Design of Imager Cryogenic Dewar and Spectrograph Re-
Imaging Optic,” in [Ground-based and Airborne Instrumentation for Astronomy IX ], SPIE (July 2022).

[11] Wright, S. A., Walth, G., Do, T., Marshall, D., Larkin, J. E., Moore, A. M., Adamkovics, M., Andersen,
D., Armus, L., Barth, A., Cote, P., Cooke, J., Chisholm, E. M., Davidge, T., Dunn, J. S., Dumas, C.,
Ellerbroek, B. L., Ghez, A. M., Hao;, L., Hayano, Y., Liu, M., Lopez-Rodriguez, E., Lu;, J. R., Mao, S.,
Marois, C., Pandey, S. B., Phillips, A. C., Schoeck, M., Subramaniam, A., Subramanian, S., Suzuki, R.,
Tan, J. C., Terai, T., Treu, T., Simard, L., Weiss, J. L., Wincentsen, J., Wong, M., and Zhang, K., “The
infrared imaging spectrograph (IRIS) for TMT: latest science cases and simulations,” in [Adaptive Optics
Systems V], SPIE (July 2016).

[12] Wright, S. A., Larkin, J. E., Moore, A. M., Do, T., Simard, L., Adamkovics, M., Armus, L., Barth, A. J.,
Barton, E., Boyce, H., Cooke, J., Cote, P., Davidge, T., Ellerbroek, B., Ghez, A. M., Liu, M. C., Lu,
J. R., Macintosh, B. A., Mao, S., Marois, C., Schoeck, M., Suzuki, R., Tan, J. C., Treu, T., Wang, L., and
Weiss, J., “The infrared imaging spectrograph (IRIS) for TMT: overview of innovative science programs,”
in [Ground-based and Airborne Instrumentation for Astronomy V ], SPIE (July 2014).

[13] Wright, S. A., Barton, E. J., Larkin, J. E., Moore, A. M., Crampton, D., and Simard, L., “The infrared
imaging spectrograph (IRIS) for TMT: sensitivities and simulations,” in [Ground-based and Airborne In-
strumentation for Astronomy III], SPIE (July 2010).

[14] Tran, H. D., Cohen, R., Mader, J. A., Colson, A., Berriman, G. B., Gelino, C. R., and KOA Team, “Data
reduction pipelines for the Keck Observatory Archive,” in [American Astronomical Society Meeting Abstracts
#227], American Astronomical Society Meeting Abstracts 227, 348.23 (Jan. 2016).

[15] Mader, J. A., Tran, H. D., Cohen, R., Colson, A., Berriman, G. B., Gelino, C. R., Kong, M., Laity, A. C.,
Swain, M. A., Wang, C., Goodrich, R., and Holt, J., “The Design and Development of the NIRSPEC
Data Reduction Pipeline for the Keck Observatory Archive,” in [Astronomical Data Analysis Software and
Systems XXV ], Lorente, N. P. F., Shortridge, K., and Wayth, R., eds., Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc
Conference Series 512, 399 (Dec. 2017).

[16] Lockhart, K. E., Do, T., Larkin, J. E., Boehle, A., Campbell, R. D., Chappell, S., Chu, D., Ciurlo, A.,
Cosens, M., Fitzgerald, M. P., Ghez, A., Lu, J. R., Lyke, J. E., Mieda, E., Rudy, A. R., Vayner, A., Walth,
G., and Wright, S. A., “Characterizing and Improving the Data Reduction Pipeline for the Keck OSIRIS
Integral Field Spectrograph,” The Astronomical Journal 157, 75 (Feb. 2019).

[17] Walth, G., Wright, S. A., Weiss, J., Larkin, J. E., Moore, A. M., Chapin, E. L., Do, T., Dunn, J., Ellerbroek,
B., Gillies, K., Hayano, Y., Johnson, C., Marshall, D., Riddle, R. L., Simard, L., Sohn, J. M., Suzuki, R., and
Wincentsen, J., “The Infrared Imaging Spectrograph (IRIS) for TMT: data reduction system,” in [Software
and Cyberinfrastructure for Astronomy IV ], SPIE (August 2016).

[18] Walth, G., Wright, S. A., Weiss, J., Larkin, J. E., Moore, A. M., Chapin, E. L., Do, T., Dunn, J., Ellerbroek,
B., Gillies, K., Hayano, Y., Johnson, C., Marshall, D., Riddle, R. L., Simard, L., Sohn, J. M., Suzuki, R.,
and Wincentsen, J., “The Infrared Imaging Spectrograph (IRIS) for TMT: advancing the DRS,” in [Software
and Cyberinfrastructure for Astronomy V ], SPIE (July 2018).

[19] Surya, A., Zonca, A., Rundquist, N., Wright, S. A., Walth, G., Weiss, J., Larkin, J. E., Moore, A. M.,
Chapin, E. L., Do, T., Dunn, J., Ellerbroek, B., Gillies, K., Hayano, Y., Johnson, C., Marshall, D., Riddle,
R. L., Simard, L., Sohn, J. M., Suzuki, R., and Wincentsen, J., “The Infrared Imaging Spectrograph (IRIS)
for TMT: Final Design Development of the Data Reduction System,” in [Software and Cyberinfrastructure
for Astronomy VI ], SPIE (July 2020).

[20] Bushouse, H., Droettboom, M., and Greenﬁeld, P., “The JWST Data Calibration Pipeline,” in [Astronom-
ical Data Analysis Software and Systems XXV ], Lorente, N. P. F., Shortridge, K., and Wayth, R., eds.,
Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc Conference Series 512, 355 (Dec. 2017).

[21] Bushouse, H., Eisenhamer, J., and Davies, J., “The JWST Data Calibration Pipeline,” in [Astronomical
Data Analysis Software and Systems XXVII], Teuben, P. J., Pound, M. W., Thomas, B. A., and Warner,
E. M., eds., Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc Conference Series 523, 543 (Oct. 2019).

[22] Grosbøl, P., “The FITS data format.,” in [Databases and On-line Data in Astronomy ], Albrecht, M. A. and

Egret, D., eds., Astrophysics and Space Science Library 171, 253–257 (Jan. 1991).

[23] Lupton, W. F., “Keck Telescope Control System,” in [Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems
IX], Manset, N., Veillet, C., and Crabtree, D., eds., Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc Conference Series
216, 261 (Jan. 2000).

[24] Berriman, G. B., Gelino, C. R., Laity, A., Kong, M., Swain, M., Holt, J., Goodrich, R., Mader, J., and
Tran, H. D., “The Operation and Architecture of the Keck Observatory Archive,” in [Astronomical Data
Analysis Software and Systems XXIII ], Manset, N. and Forshay, P., eds., Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc
Conference Series 485, 123 (May 2014).

[25] Berriman, G. B., Gelino, C. R., Goodrich, R. W., Holt, J., Kong, M., Laity, A. C., Mader, J. A., Swain, M.,
and Tran, H. D., “The design and operation of the Keck Observatory archive,” in [Software and Cyberinfras-
tructure for Astronomy III ], Chiozzi, G. and Radziwill, N. M., eds., Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation
Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series 9152, 91520A (July 2014).

[26] Tran, H. D., Holt, J., Goodrich, R. W., Mader, J. A., Swain, M., Laity, A. C., Kong, M., Gelino, C. R.,
and Berriman, G. B., “Metadata and data management for the Keck Observatory Archive,” in [Software
and Cyberinfrastructure for Astronomy III ], Chiozzi, G. and Radziwill, N. M., eds., Society of Photo-Optical
Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series 9152, 91522I (July 2014).

[27] Berriman, G. B., Holt, J. M., Mader, J. A., Tran, H. D., Goodrich, R. W., Gelino, C. R., Laity, A. C.,
Kong, M., and Swain, M. A., “Data and Metadata Management at the Keck Observatory Archive,” in
[Astronomical Data Analysis Software an Systems XXIV (ADASS XXIV) ], Taylor, A. R. and Rosolowsky,
E., eds., Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc Conference Series 495, 535 (Sept. 2015).

