2
2
0
2

g
u
A
7
2

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

2
v
2
0
5
8
0
.
8
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Fibercuit: Prototyping High-Resolution Flexible and Kirigami
Circuits with a Fiber Laser Engraver

Zeyu Yan∗
zeyuy@umd.edu
Department of Computer Science,
University of Maryland, College Park
College Park, MD, USA

Anup Sathya∗
anupsat@umd.edu
Department of Computer Science,
University of Maryland, College Park
College Park, MD, USA

Sahra Yusuf
fyusuf4@gmu.edu
George Mason University
Fairfax, VA, USA

Jyh-Ming Lien
jmlien@gmu.edu
George Mason University
Fairfax, VA, USA

Huaishu Peng
huaishu@umd.edu
Department of Computer Science,
University of Maryland, College Park
College Park, MD, USA

Figure 1: Fibercuit overview. a) Our fiber laser engraver setup with a custom rotary table. b) Cutting the conductive layer on our
custom composite using the fiber laser. c) A kirigami flower circuit that can function as an Arduino. d) A custom stretchable
flex cable. e) A kirigami crane with a battery holder and 2 LEDs.

ABSTRACT
Prototyping compact devices with unique form factors often re-
quires the PCB manufacturing process to be outsourced, which
can be expensive and time-consuming. In this paper, we present
Fibercuit, a set of rapid prototyping techniques to fabricate high-
resolution, flexible circuits on-demand using a fiber laser engraver.
We showcase techniques that can laser cut copper-based composites
to form fine-pitch conductive traces, laser fold copper substrates
that can form kirigami structures, and laser solder surface-mount
electrical components using off-the-shelf soldering pastes. Com-
bined with our software pipeline, an end user can design and fabri-
cate flexible circuits which are dual-layer and three-dimensional,
thereby exhibiting a wide range of form factors. We demonstrate
Fibercuit by showcasing a set of examples, including a custom dice,
flex cables, custom end-stop switches, electromagnetic coils, LED
earrings and a circuit in the form of kirigami crane.

∗Both authors contributed equally to this research.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
UIST ’22, October 29-November 2, 2022, Bend, OR, USA
© 2022 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9320-1/22/10. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3526113.3545652

CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing → Interactive systems and tools;
Interaction devices; • Hardware → Printed circuit boards.

KEYWORDS
fiber laser, laser cut, PCB, circuit board, kirigami, flexible PCB

ACM Reference Format:
Zeyu Yan, Anup Sathya, Sahra Yusuf, Jyh-Ming Lien, and Huaishu Peng.
2022. Fibercuit: Prototyping High-Resolution Flexible and Kirigami Circuits
with a Fiber Laser Engraver. In The 35th Annual ACM Symposium on User
Interface Software and Technology (UIST ’22), October 29-November 2, 2022,
Bend, OR, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 13 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3526113.3545652

1 INTRODUCTION
In the ongoing effort to weave computing into our daily lives [49],
designing smart devices has been a major research focus in HCI. As
these devices aim to discreetly recede into the environment or onto
the user’s body, they usually possess small and unconventional form
factors. Building and prototyping such devices requires multiple
rounds of iterative design to successfully integrate the function into
the form. While the consumerization of 3D printers and laser cutters
has shortened the iteration cycle, this advancement has been largely
withheld from the PCB design and manufacturing process. Due to
their flexibility and convenience, breadboards are still the most
popular method to quickly prototype circuits. Apart from requiring
bulky breakout boards for all surface-mounted components (SMD),

 
 
 
 
 
 
UIST ’22, October 29-November 2, 2022, Bend, OR, USA

Yan and Sathya, et al.

integrating breadboards into compact designs where the form factor
ideally blends into the background — like IoT and wearables —
remains a challenge. In these instances, researchers and makers
rely on outsourcing PCB fabrication to a small-batch manufacturer.
As this outsourcing is not just limited to the final product but also
for intermediate iterations, along with the economic burden, this
introduces weeks to months of delay in the prototyping process.

Thus far, chemical etching [2] and CNC milling [24, 44] have
been two of the most commonly used circuit prototyping methods
by makers and researchers. In chemical etching, copper is selec-
tively dissolved on a masked substrate to create conductive traces.
This method can be used to create circuits that are either rigid
or flexible. Unfortunately, the chemical etching process can easily
lead to over or under etching of the traces. The resolution, and
therefore the minimum width of the traces and pads, is often fairly
large [15], limiting the capability to prototype small circuits or those
which require fine-pitch SMD components. Handling corrosive and
toxic chemicals in a maker environment also presents a few safety
challenges. Desktop CNC milling machines have been used to man-
ufacture rigid PCBs on solid substrates. Although reliable and safe,
this method cannot always support unconventional and compact
form factors which require a flexible PCB. Circuits have also been
directly integrated into paper, thermoplastic, and laser-cut artifacts
using conductive ink [19, 30, 42, 46], filament [9, 16] or copper
wires [33]. Although these methods afford unconventional shapes,
like chemical etching, the electrical characteristics are constrained
by the methods and the materials. For example, soldering small,
fine-pitched SMD components onto a paper-based circuit or a 3D
printed object is extremely challenging, if not impossible.

This paper presents Fibercuit, a suite of techniques to fabricate
high-resolution flexible circuits suitable for rapid prototyping. Our
techniques are centered around a desktop fiber laser engraver. These
machines are similar to 𝐶𝑂2 laser cutters which are commonly seen
in maker spaces or lab settings, but are usually used to engrave
metallic materials, i.e., engraving initials on the back of a mobile
phone or a tablet. In this work, we re-purpose the fiber laser en-
graver to fabricate custom flexible circuits. We showcase the laser
cutting workflow to fabricate standard flexible circuits, as well as
a suite of additional techniques using the fiber laser engraver to
solder SMD components and fabricate circuits with kirigami shapes.
These techniques are unique to fiber laser machines and, when com-
bined, allow us to fabricate circuits with greater varieties in size,
stiffness, and malleability; The copper traces made with Fibercuit
are also high-resolution (as low as 8 mils), which, to the best of our
knowledge, was typically achieved only in professional workflows
in the past.

We report the configuration of the machine, the process of prepar-
ing custom circuit composites, and the techniques we have devel-
oped to enable the fabrication of flexible circuit boards. We also
introduce a software interface that allows an end user to design
custom circuits on kirigami shapes by simulating and visualizing
the folding process. The software also generates the vector files
required by the fiber laser engraver to fabricate the kirigami circuit.
We conclude with several fabricated examples that highlight the
benefits of our method, along with a discussion of the limitations
of our approach and possible future improvements.

2 RELATED WORKS
Our contribution builds upon prior research focused on fabricating
circuits using off-the-shelf machines, fabricating circuits using a
laser beam, and fabricating circuits beyond conventional 2D form
factors.

2.1 Fabricating Circuits Using Off-the-Shelf

Machines

As discussed in the introduction, several approaches have been
adopted to fabricate circuits on demand. For example, CNC ma-
chines such as LPKF ProMat [24] and Bantam PCB milling tools [44]
have been used in maker spaces and lab settings as they offer reliable
creation of conductive traces. However, because these machines use
a high-speed spindle to selectively remove copper from traditional
FR-4 blank boards, the substrate must be rigid. Flexible circuits
that are commonly used in small devices or wearables cannot be
fabricated with most CNC machines.

To make flexible circuits in-house, researchers have proposed
different fabrication techniques utilizing off-the-shelf machines
or custom circuit substrates. For example, chemical etching [2]
is a widely adopted method in the DIY community [5] as well as
in HCI research (e.g., [15]) as the procedure does not require any
highly specialized equipment. However, the chemical reaction can-
not guarantee high-quality conductive traces as over-etching and
under-etching are very common. Handling corrosive chemicals also
requires additional safety measures. Researchers have also explored
the fabrication of flexible circuits using low-cost plotting tools. For
example, vinyl cutters have been used to cut conformal conduc-
tive traces out of adhesive foils [38] and gold leaf [18]. A series
of works [4, 10, 11, 19, 31, 32, 34] present techniques that utilize
commodity inkjet printers to fabricate circuits on paper or custom
film. While these approaches can create flexible circuits on thin-film
substrates, the conductive traces are either low-resolution (e.g. with
a width limit of 0.5mm or 20 mils, according to [19]), or have low
conductivity, due to the ink’s high volume resistance compared
to that of copper (4-200 µΩ cm−1 vs. 1.68 µΩ cm−1). Substrate ma-
terials such as paper are also fragile, requiring extra care during
prototyping.

Similar to the aforementioned approaches, Fibercuit is based on
using off-the-shelf machinery with a custom substrate. However,
since our method removes copper material with a high-energy laser
beam that has no direct contact with the substrate, Fibercuit can
produce high-resolution conductive traces suitable for prototyping
small and flexible circuits. Aside from this, our custom substrate is
based on Kapton tape, providing higher robustness when compared
to other flexible substrates such as paper.

2.2 Fabricating Circuits using a Laser Beam
Due to the democratization of 𝐶𝑂2 gas laser cutters, they are now
commonplace in research labs and maker spaces. This has inspired
HCI researchers to explore methods to fabricate circuits with lasers.
Since 𝐶𝑂2 lasers are primarily used to cut organic materials (e.g.
acrylic, rubber, and wood) and not metals, they are unable to cut
conductive traces directly. Instead, researchers have employed laser
cutters to create stencils, masks, or molding templates into which
conductive material is added. For example, Silicone Devices [29]

Fibercuit

UIST ’22, October 29-November 2, 2022, Bend, OR, USA

presents a DIY workflow to fabricate multi-layered soft circuits.
The 𝐶𝑂2 laser precisely cuts layered vinyl masks into which liquid
metal can be injected. Similarly, iSkin [48] laser-patterns silicone
elastomers such as PDMS and cPDMS to create conductive lines
and electrodes, onto which additional silicone is added to seal the
circuit traces.

Recently, researchers have also explored the possibility of di-
rectly generating conductive traces using a 𝐶𝑂2 laser cutter. Laser-
Factory [30] demonstrates a modified end effector that can deposit
and solidify conductive silver ink using laser-generated heat. Circ-
Wood [17] presents a novel approach to generate electrical traces
by partially carbonizing the surface of the wood using a laser cutter.
LASEC [12] uses a laser cutter to ablate conductive materials such
as ITO, Ag paint and PEDOT:PSS to form stretchable conductive
traces. While these techniques open up opportunities to enable
the rapid prototyping of circuits with common laser machinery,
the circuit size and the trace width are generally incomparable
with flexible printed circuits from the industry, and thus, circuits
fabricated using the aforementioned methods are usually sizeable.
Besides commodity 𝐶𝑂2 laser machines, high-end laser machines
have been used to prototype flexible circuits with small form factors.
For example, UV laser machines that specialize in circuit prototyp-
ing have been used to manufacture flexible wearable electronic
devices ([1, 25]). Advanced laser machines that include both 𝐶𝑂2
and fiber laser heads (e.g. [41]) have been used to fabricate flexible
circuits [20].

Fibercuit uses a commodity fiber laser engraver machine that
contains a single fiber laser source. We showcase how Fibercuit
can cut substrates which contain both a copper layer as well as a
polyamide Kapton layer with fine details. Since a fiber laser engraver
is affordable (as of 2022, a 50W desktop fiber laser engraver [6] is
around 5K USD, which is within the same price range as a hobby
𝐶𝑂2 laser such as [36]), our approach has the potential to democra-
tize ways of rapid prototyping high-quality flexible circuits in lab
and maker settings.

2.3 Fabricating Circuits beyond 2D
In order to add sensing and display capabilities to daily objects
or environments, HCI researchers have proposed different ways
to blend circuits into ambient space through hydrography [11],
inkjet printing [19, 32], spray painting [50, 51], and custom plotting
devices [3, 35]. These approaches allow post-hoc application of
in-situ circuitry on existing objects or surfaces.

Researchers have also looked into prototyping circuits in 3D
form factors, commonly through 3D printing. For example, cus-
tom sensors can be printed either directly using conductive fila-
ment [9, 39, 40] or by post-treating the materials using laser fus-
ing [43] or electroplating [16, 21]. Alongside multi-material print-
ing, conformal circuits or breadboard structures can be integrated
into 3D printed objects with conductive ink injection [37, 52] or
thermal mounted copper foils [45].

Compared to 3D printing the entire hull of the object, quasi-
kirigami methods like cutting, folding and bending can create 2.5D
circuits with flat materials. As examples, Lo et.al [23] and Wang
et.al[46] manage to create 2.5D circuits from pre-processed 2D

materials. [26, 31, 38, 42] combine printed circuits and the flexibility
of paper to customize paper crafts with electronics.

While Fibercuit is primarily a rapid prototyping method for
small-scale flexible circuits, we also present additional techniques to
fold copper substrates to form circuits beyond 2D. Unlike previous
work that uses 𝐶𝑂2 laser cutters to bend acrylic sheets based on
gravity [8, 22, 28, 47], a fiber laser can control the bending angle of
a metallic sheet computationally [13, 14, 22]. We showcase how the
bending of metal sheets can be combined with circuit prototyping
to create 3D artifacts with integrated mechanical and electrical
features.

3 BACKGROUND ON FIBER LASER
𝐶𝑂2 lasers are now commonplace in a lot of maker environments,
but the commercial expansion and adoption of fiber lasers are rel-
atively recent and limited. For a user, the fundamental difference
between a 𝐶𝑂2 laser and a fiber laser is the type of materials that can
be processed by each type of laser. 𝐶𝑂2 lasers (10 600 nm range) are
able to cut organic materials like textiles, wood and cardboard. For
inorganic materials like metal, a high-power fiber laser (1060 nm
range) is appropriate. In addition to the wavelength, fiber lasers
innately produce a higher quality (better focused) beam which not
only increases the efficiency of the laser but also enables a higher
resolution while cutting and rastering. Fiber lasers also use a 2-axis
galvanometer laser scanner as opposed to the slower 2-axis gantry
system commonly seen in 𝐶𝑂2 lasers. This results in a smaller
working area, but much faster cutting and rastering speeds.

While the most popular consumer demand for fiber lasers revolve
around engraving metallic devices to customize them, we see an
opportunity to re-purpose a fiber laser engraver for flexible circuit
prototyping due to its high-efficiency, high-quality cutting results
and high speed. Our work and experiments are based on an off-the-
shelf 50W desktop fiber laser engraver [6] as is shown in Figure 1a.

4 FIBERCUIT
In essence, a basic dual-layer flexible circuit is a sandwich structure
with a conductive layer on either side and a dielectric insulating
layer in between. The top and bottom layers contain conductive
traces, pads, and pours. The dielectric layer hosts the conductive
elements and electrically isolates the two layers (Figure 2). In addi-
tion to the sandwich structure, a circuit board must perform three
functions. One, enable the affixing of electronic components at
designated spots — through-hole or surface mount. Two, provide
reliable electrical contact between the terminals of the electronic
components — traces. Three, allow interconnections between con-
ductive layers — vias.

As a dual-layer circuit is an extension of a single-layer circuit—
with an additional conductive layer on the opposite side and vias to
interconnect between layers, we first explain our basic techniques
with a single-layer circuit, then introduce the techniques required
to manufacture a dual-layer circuit. We first introduce a custom
substrate containing the conductive and dielectric layers that can
be cut by the fiber laser. We then introduce techniques to create
traces and the isolation between them to form functional circuits.
We explain how vias are created to enable dual-layer circuits and
finally detail the post-processing methods to add robustness. All

UIST ’22, October 29-November 2, 2022, Bend, OR, USA

Yan and Sathya, et al.

laser engraving parameters for these techniques are summarized
in Table 1, towards the end of the paper.

Figure 3: Circuit substrate preparation. a) Applying Kapton
tape to the copper sheet. b) Passing the copper-Kapton com-
posite through a roll former. c) Punching alignment holes.

the Kapton tape performs satisfactorily. It is also important to avoid
bubbles between the two layers, as failures in this step will result
in an uneven substrate surface that affects the laser cutting process.
The procedure described below highlights the steps required to
ensure adequate adhesion.

Step 1: The copper sheet needs to be thoroughly cleaned with
Isopropyl Alcohol (IPA) to remove surface dirt and grime. In case
the copper sheet is heavily oxidized, a light sanding with fine-grit
sandpaper or an abrasive pad can also be employed. Wearing gloves
while handling the copper sheet prevents further oxidization or
grime collection.

Step 2: Once the surface of the copper is thoroughly cleaned,
fresh Kapton tape is applied (Figure 3a). The Kapton-taped copper
sheet is passed through the slip of a roll former (Figure 3b) together
with a piece of styrene to evenly press the composite together.

Step 3: On occasions where the substrate needs to be intermit-
tently taken on and off the laser bed during the cutting process, we
create alignment holes in the substrate using a hole punch tool that
matches the dowel pins on our material clamping bed (Figure 3c).
Note that Step 2 is critical in the material preparation process
and should not be ignored. It performs three functions. One, it
allows the silicone adhesive on the surface of the Kapton tape
to strongly adhere to the copper. Two, it helps remove any air
bubbles that arise during the taping process. Three, it flattens the
copper-Kapton composite, removing any bends or kinks, creating a
flat surface for the laser engraver to work effectively. The copper-
Kapton composite is passed multiple times through the slip roll
former (while gradually reducing the gap between the rollers) until
the stock is adequately flat, kink-free, and bubble-free.

Also note that there can be slight variations to the composite
preparation procedure above. For example, while using Kapton
tape that is thinner than 2 mils, ensuring a bubble-free surface is
challenging. In this case, soapy water is sprayed onto the surface of
the copper and the adhesive side of the Kapton tape. After applying
the Kapton tape to the copper sheet, a scraper is used to squeeze
the soapy water out — thereby pushing the bubbles out.

While fabricating dual-layer circuits, we follow the same proce-
dure up to this point by replacing the single-sided Kapton with a
double-sided Kapton. After one conductive layer is satisfactorily
attached to one side of the Kapton, we repeat the process to attach
another copper sheet to the other side of the Kapton, forming a
sandwich.

Figure 2: An illustration explaining the structure of a circuit.

4.1 Preparing Circuit Substrates
Our circuit substrate is a structure containing copper sheets and
single or double-sided polyamide Kapton tape. The copper sheet
acts as the conductive layer; the Kapton tape acts as the dielectric
insulating layer and also structurally holds the traces, pads, and
pours on the conductive layer.

4.1.1 Conductive Layer. We experimented with copper sheets of
different thicknesses (0.03 mm, 0.05 mm, 0.1 mm, 0.15 mm, and 0.2
mm). A 50W fiber laser machine can successfully cut all copper
sheets thoroughly. As our primary goal is to fabricate flexible cir-
cuits, we excluded thicker copper from our experiments. Besides,
using thicker copper introduces trade-offs which are discussed in
Section 9.1.

4.1.2 Dielectric Insulating Layer. When identifying an insulating
material, one primary factor is to ensure that it can be cut by a
fiber laser engraver. Holes, drills, and the dimension outline of the
board require both the copper and the insulating layers to be cut
through. As discussed in Section 3, the wavelength of the fiber
laser is not ideal to cut through organic materials. We therefore
tested multiple materials, including Kapton tape, thin acrylic sheet,
Delrin, and styrene, to find one that can be reliably cut with a fiber
laser source. Among all the materials, polyamide Kapton was the
most suitable. It can be lightly engraved by a fiber laser but not
cut through. When bonded to copper sheets, however, the heat
generated while cutting the copper transfers to Kapton, allowing it
to be cut through. Kapton also possesses a great dielectric strength
(7700 V/mil for a 1 mil thick film) and remains stable from -269 to
400 °C. We experimented with Kapton tapes of 1 mil, 2 mils, and
5 mils thickness which can all be reliably cut with the fiber laser
when bonded with a copper sheet.

Fabrication. As the composite material is directly processed
4.1.3
by the laser, it is imperative to ensure a strong bond between the
copper and Kapton layers. We found that the silicone adhesive on

Fibercuit

UIST ’22, October 29-November 2, 2022, Bend, OR, USA

4.2 Fabricating Conductive Traces
As shown in Figure 2, a conductive trace is a connection between
pads that are bonded to the insulating Kapton layer while being
fully isolated from the rest of the conductors. Therefore, creating
conductive traces in a circuit board requires the selective removal of
copper to prevent an electrical short. It is critical for the fiber laser to
penetrate the copper layer while keeping the bottom isolating layer
intact to ensure that different traces are not electrically shorted.
The copper in the isolating area should also be easily removable
without damaging the structure of the circuit.

4.2.1 Cutting the Outline of the Traces and the Isolating Area. A
conductive trace is created using vector cutting, where the beam of
the fiber laser irradiates the outline of the surrounding isolating area.
In order to gain precise control over the cutting depth to ensure that
the laser beam fully penetrates the top copper layer while keeping
the bottom layer intact, the vector cutting process is performed with
multiple passes at high speed. The cutting parameters vary based
on the substrate composition (See Table 1 for details). For example,
for the sample circuit presented in Figure 4, the conductive traces
are cut with the laser at a speed of 500 mm s−1, a power of 60%,
and a total of 14 passes. Note that excess heat may be generated
during the cutting process, creating local warping or affecting the
adhesion of the Kapton. We alleviate them by introducing a delay
between successive cutting passes, which allows the material to
cool down and avoids the adhesive’s the carbonization (parameters
reported in Table 1).

After experimenting with multiple trace widths, we found that
the minimum trace width that can be cut with ∼100% repeatability
is 8 mils, which is currently more or less on par with small-batch
manufacturers. We also tested the minimal clearance width that
can be generated reliably — 4 mils. We note that the trace width
and clearance can potentially be reduced further. For example, we
successfully test cut a circuit with a trace clearance of 2 mils and a
trace width of 4 mils. However, while the isolation is still achievable,
the main problem with the even smaller clearance is that manually
peeling the isolation becomes less practical (See Section 4.2.2). Thus,
we decided not to explore the limits of the trace width, as we
believe that the aforementioned resolution is already suggesting
that Fibercuit is suitable for prototyping high-resolution circuits
and incorporating small SMD components. (See Figure 7e and f for
examples).

4.2.2 Peeling the Isolating Area. Once the outline is cut, the isolat-
ing area needs to be peeled away from the substrate. This is mostly
done manually using a pair of tweezers (Figure 4a). To ease the
peeling process and to keep the rest of the circuit traces in place,
it is helpful to reduce the adhesion between the isolation area and
the Kapton underneath. In order to do so, we apply high-speed
laser rastering on top of the isolating area. Different from vector
cutting, laser rastering scans through the area of interest with the
laser beam irradiating an entire area instead of a path. In our case,
applying laser rastering to the isolating area with the copper that
has to be peeled generates enough heat to slightly carbonate the sil-
icone adhesive of the Kapton tape. It also introduces some internal
stress that curls up the edges of the copper. As a result, although a
manual process, the isolating area can be easily peeled away from

the substrate. Table 1 reports the rastering parameters that apply
to our substrate.

Figure 4: a) Peeling the isolating area using a pair of sharp
tipped tweezers. b) Circuit before and after the isolating ar-
eas are peeled off. c) Sample circuit in a single-layer format.
d) Sample circuit in a dual-layer format (front). e) Sample
circuit in a dual-layer format (back).

4.2.3 Cutting Through: Holes, Drills, and Dimension. Circuit boards
usually contain holes and drills to house through-hole components.
They require the laser to cut through the conductive layer and the
Kapton layer at the same time. The same applies to the board dimen-
sion to get the circuit off the working stock. Table 1 summarizes
the required process parameters. Overall, cutting through needs
a much higher energy density at any given time. For example, in
the sample circuit shown in Figure 4 c, the cutting speed is 5 times
slower than that used while cutting the trace outlines.

4.2.4 Vias. As a general design guideline, the via design has to
be slightly altered to accommodate our fabrication procedure. The
width of the annular ring is set to 50 mils (1.27 mm) and the drill
size is set to 30 mils (0.762 mm). Although this is larger than the
minimum size of a standard factory manufactured via, the increased
drill size allows us to pass a single-core wire through the via. The
larger annular ring allows adequate space to solder the inserted
wire on both the layers.

4.3 Circuit Samples
At this stage, we have the building blocks required to generate both
single-layer and dual-layer circuits. In Figure 4 c, we show a single-
layer sample circuit with 7 SMD components, including one 32-pin
ATMEGA168 microcontroller (TQFP package) with 0.8 mm pitch,
two 0805 SMD resistors and capacitors, one 16MHz crystal oscillator,
one 1206 LED, one tactile reset button, and one CR1220 coin cell
holder. It also has nine through-hole pin-head terminals to provide
access to the GPIOs with standard 2.54 mm pitch and 2 mm holes.
The circuit is laser cut using the copper-Kapton composite with
an overall thickness of 0.15 mm. The sample circuit board has an

UIST ’22, October 29-November 2, 2022, Bend, OR, USA

Yan and Sathya, et al.

overall size of 42 mm by 22.5 mm. It can perform standard Arduino
Nano functionalities and in a flexible form factor along with an
onboard battery. The entire fabrication process took approximately
30 minutes, with roughly 5 minutes of laser machining time and
25 minutes of “human time” — preparing material, peeling the
isolation, and soldering the component. As a result, we note that
the time taken for a particular circuit has multiple confounding
factors, but the “machine time” is often negligible.

Figure 4 d and e demonstrate a dual-layer version of the Arduino
Nano circuit. In this version, we move the battery holder to the rear
of the circuit. This adds two vias — one for Vcc and one for ground.
The dual-layer circuit board has the same components in a smaller
footprint (30 mm by 22.5 mm).

4.4 Post Processing
Although the steps mentioned above allow us to fabricate single-
and dual-layer circuits, additional protection can be added to the
conductor’s surface to prevent oxidization and improve its durabil-
ity. At this point, a standard UV curable solder mask can be applied
to the circuit. Once the solder mask is applied to the entire surface,
the circuit can be placed on the laser bed again. The fiber laser
can be used in the rastering mode to etch the solder mask away
to expose the soldering pads (Figure 5 left). Alternatively, a layer
of pre-cut photoresist film with the solder pads already exposed
(Figure 5 right) can also be applied to the circuit as a protective
layer.

Figure 5: Additional protection can be added to flexible cir-
cuits. Left, a UV curable resin is applied to the surface of a
single layer circuit. Right, the sample circuit is bonded with
a layer of photoresist film.

5 FIBERCUIT++
So far, we have introduced the foundations of Fibercuit, a suite
of techniques to create conventional single or dual-layer flexible
circuits. Beyond that, Fibercuit also affords new electronic proto-
typing opportunities such as tuning the flexibility of the circuit,
using the laser to directly solder the components onto the board,
and leveraging copper’s malleability to fabricate kirigami circuits

that amalgamates electrical and mechanical properties. We now
detail these opportunities.

5.1 Circuits Flexibility
The copper and the Kapton present their own unique mechani-
cal properties in our dual-material composite. The copper sheet
presents plasticity, ductility, and malleability, while the Kapton
presents flexibility without much permanent deformation when
the applied force is small and spread out. Each material’s properties
are also heavily dependent on its individual thicknesses. By using
and combining a range of thicknesses, we can produce a variety of
mechanical properties in the circuit board, ranging from thin and
flexible circuits (like a flex-PCB) to thick and rigid circuits. Figure 6
demonstrates the range of rigidity in the composite.

Figure 6: Test samples from left to right: composite with cop-
per layer of 0.03 mm, 0.05 mm, 0.1 mm, 0.15 mm, and 0.2 mm
thickness respectively and Kapton layer of 5 mils. Sample
size: 20 mm by 10 mm. Weight: 20 g.

5.2 Fiber Laser Soldering
Heat is generated constantly while circuit traces are cut with a
fiber laser, which can be potentially utilized to solder electrical
components and further mechanize the circuit fabrication process.
Previous work such as [30] has shown that by defocusing a 𝐶𝑂2
laser, the generated heat can be used to melt and solder conductive
inks. Unfortunately, due to copper’s high thermal conductivity and
the working principle of a fiber laser, high-powered defocused ras-
tering cannot generate enough heat to reflow solder paste. Instead,
we propose to cut a small amount of sacrificial material at or around
the solder spots to generate the heat required to reflow the solder.
The general process of fiber laser soldering is to first apply solder
paste (e.g. [27]) to the trace terminals, place the components, and
then laser cut the surrounding sacrificial area for reflow. While the
main soldering principle remains the same, different component
packages may require slightly varied approaches.

For through-hole components and vias, there is no need to
change the circuit footprints, as they provide existing sacrificial
areas (Figure 7a) on the pads, which can be used to cut a tiny 0.1 mm
to 0.3 mm hole (Figure 7c and e). This procedure generates the re-
quired heat to reflow the solder and does not affect the electrical or
structural integrity of the circuit.

In other cases, when the footprint does not have a sacrificial area
but the component has extended solder pins (like TQFP packages),
the laser can directly irradiate the pins (Figure 7 b and d). As the
laser is calibrated to cut thin copper (0.03 mm), this generates the

Fibercuit

UIST ’22, October 29-November 2, 2022, Bend, OR, USA

We acquired the number of cutting passes vs. the bending angle
relations with the following experiment: we cut samples with the
cutting passes increased from 5 to 125 with 5-pass increments and
measured the corresponding bending angles. We ran three trials to
get the passes vs. angle relations. The Average S.D. across all angles
is 0.967 degree. The process parameters are reported in Table 1.

Figure 7: Fiber laser can be used to solder through-hole and
SMD components.

Figure 8: Bending angle vs. engraving pass number.

required heat to reflow solder but does not damage the extended
pins.

Packages like tubular passive components (capacitors, resistors)
do not provide any additional space on the footprint onto which a
small hole can be cut. In this case, the footprint of the component is
modified during the circuit design phase to enable laser soldering.
For example, we slightly extended the pads on a 0805 SMD capacitor
(Figure 7 e) to create a space where a 0.3 mm hole can be cut to
generate the heat required to reflow the solder. Just like the other
cases, the Kapton under the 0.3 mm hole remains unscathed.

5.3 Laser Forming Circuits
By employing the temperature gradient mechanism (TGM) [7],
the copper in our composite can be laser formed, i.e., bending
upwards and away from the original plane (Figure 9a). This can
provide additional layers of mechanical freedom, functionality, and
interactivity.

5.3.1 Bending angle vs. pass number. Essentially, using multiple
passes along the same irradiation path, the laser beam induces a
steep temperature gradient along the irradiation path across the
thickness of the copper sheet. By performing multiple passes, this
process can be used to bend the copper sheet along the path com-
putationally, with the bending angle being estimated directly from
the number of cutting passes.

As can be seen in Figure 8, the bending angle monotonically
increases with the number of passes applied along the cutting
path, but with a decrease in the bend angle per pass over time.

5.3.2 Achieve higher bending angle. As is shown in Figure 8, the
relationship between bend angle and number of passes tapers off
under high pass numbers. To achieve higher bending angle, we have
experimented with two empirical solutions: 1) the power of the
laser can be mildly increased when the bend angle starts to level out,
and 2) create multiple parallel irradiation paths to create multiple
bends close to each other. Usually, the bend angle starts to level
out at around 40-90 passes (depending on the power percentage
setting) when the power is kept constant. When it starts to level out,
slightly increasing the power by about 3% will maintain the bend
angle per pass. Using this constant increase, starting from about
42% power and going all the way up to 80-85%, we can increase the
ceiling of the bending angle from ∼60° degree to ∼90° (Figure 9 a)
for a given set of process parameters. The second approach involves
creating multiple closely parallel irradiation paths. In this case, the
∼90° bend angle can be achieved while maintaining constant power
(Figure 9 b).

Sometimes, the Kapton layer interferes with the laser forming
process. In order to reduce this interference, we flipped the circuit
on the bed and selectively etch the Kapton away in rastering mode.
This removes a small patch of Kapton just under the area that is to
be laser formed, therefore reducing the interference of the Kapton
layer during laser forming.

kirigami circuits with laser forming. This ability to laser form
5.3.3
the material allows us to explore unconventional shapes in circuits
manufactured using our method. For example, our sample circuit
can move away from a traditional rectangular flat shape into a

UIST ’22, October 29-November 2, 2022, Bend, OR, USA

Yan and Sathya, et al.

6.1 Custom Dice
As explained in Section 5.1, having the ability to play with the
malleability of the circuit allows us to prototype unique examples
to leverage this property. In this example, we designed a custom dice
with LEDs on all 6 sides that are randomly illuminated when the
user shakes the dice (Figure 10d). The dice contains an ATMega168
(and its operating circuit), a tilt ball switch, a battery holder, and 6
1206 LEDs (Figure 10a and b). In a dual-layer design, the LEDs are
placed on the exterior face of the dice and the other components
are on the interior face. By leveraging the malleability of the circuit,
the structural component of our object comes from the circuit itself.

Figure 9: a) to c) Bending copper-Kapton composites to 90° us-
ing different approaches. d) A laser formed placement guide
for an ATTiny85. e) Arduino Nano circuit on a kirigami
flower shape.

kirigami flower-like shape with the petals bent by the laser (Figure
9e). Apart from visual exploration, this technique also allows us
to incorporate additional functionality. For example, as shown in
Figure 9d, the copper can be bent to form a placement guide for
SMD components on the circuit board. This aids the user as well
as keeps the component in place during the reflow process if a hot
air gun is being used. This ability can also afford the fabrication
of custom sensors (Section 6.3) and kirigami objects (Section 6.6).
The laser forming not only applies to the circuit’s structure but
also applies to the traces. This allows us to place components on
different planes in a kirigami circuit (See examples in Section 6.1 &
6.6).

5.4 Order of Operations Involving Laser

Soldering and Forming

Based on the features being incorporated into the circuit board, the
order of operations varies. Intrinsically, the composite board stock
is generated at the very beginning, followed by cutting the pads
and conductors, isolating them and then finally soldering the com-
ponents. In cases where laser forming is being incorporated, the
order of the forming step is design-dependent. In some cases, it’s
better to solder the components before attempting laser forming as
the soldering difficulty increases when the form factor is unconven-
tional. In other cases the soldering procedure might not be impeded
by the change in the form factor; the bending can occur before.
To aid the decision on the operation angle, we have developed a
software interface with a 3D view to simulate the circuit before and
after laser forming. This is further described in Section 7.

6 EXAMPLES
Fibercuit can be used to fabricate high-resolution, flexible, and
kirigami circuits. In this section, we highlight a few archetypes
to demonstrate the capabilities and opportunities that Fibercuit
enables.

Figure 10: A custom dice fabricated using Fibercuit. a) Inte-
rior face of the circuit board after the fabrication process. b)
Exterior face. c) & d) Folding the dice and using the circuit
as the structure.

6.2 Flex Cable
Due to the flexible nature of the circuits and the high resolution
of Fibercuit, we can fabricate custom flex cables on demand. In
this example, we demonstrate 2 cables — a classic right-angle cable
and a stretchable cable that is rare to find off-the-shelf (Figure 11a
and b). Both cables are designed to work with a Raspberry Pi and a
15-pin Pi camera module (Figure 11c). The custom, stretchable cable
grants flexibility for designers during the prototyping phase, as a
designer can experiment with different camera placements with
the stretchable cable set instead of being restricted to a pre-chosen
length.

6.3 Custom End-Stop Switch
Fibercuit can be used to make custom sensors with integrated elec-
trical and mechanical features in one package. Here, we demon-
strate a small end-stop switch (footprint: 13 mm by 7 mm) that is
laser-folded using Fibercuit (including laser forming the sensor).
The two contact leaves are isolated by default, and the circuit is
complete when a force is applied to push one of the copper leaves.
An additional LED is added as part of the switch circuit to indicate
its status. This mechanism can be extended to contact sensors and
pressure sensors with custom form factors as required by the user.

Fibercuit

UIST ’22, October 29-November 2, 2022, Bend, OR, USA

Figure 11: Flex cables fabricated using Fibercuit. a) Right an-
gle flex connector. b) Stretchable flex connector. c) Stretch-
able flex connector between a Raspberry Pi and a Pi camera
module.

6.4 Electromagnetic Coils
An electromagnetic coil has multiple applications as actuators, in-
ductance sensors, buzzers, and even prototype motors. Using Fiber-
cuit, we can fabricate flexible 2-layer electromagnetic coils in cus-
tom form factors. We showcase this by creating a flapping actuator
in the shape of a butterfly (Figure 13) where the electromagnetic
wings repel the magnets in the 3D printed structure underneath to
generate a flapping motion. This butterfly can also act as a speaker
when connected to an audio amplifier.

6.5 LED Earrings
Figure 14 demonstrates a custom dome-shape earring with a size
of 15 mm × 15 mm × 20 mm. A coin battery provides the weight
required to deform the earring into the dome shape and is also used
to light up the LED. This earring demonstrates how Fibercuit can
enable the fabrication of miniature wearables by consolidating the
embedded electronics and the form factor of the device.

6.6 Kirigami Crane
The addition of laser forming (Section 5.3) enables us to explore
kirigami circuits like the crane pictured in Figure 15. After fabricat-
ing the circuit and soldering the components onto it, the circuit is
placed onto the bed and laser formed to form the kirigami crane
with a battery holder and 2 LEDs. The ability to create kirigami
structures could enable the prototyping of custom aesthetic wear-
ables that appeal to users.

Figure 12: a) A custom end-stop switch with integrated LED,
fabricated using Fibercuit, alongside a standard end-stop
switch. b) End-stop switch installed on a 3D printer. No con-
nection when the contact leaves are apart. c) The LED glows
when the contact leaves touch each other.

Figure 13: A flapping actuator in the shape of a butterfly. a)
Resting state. b) Repelling state.

7 USER INTERFACE
Most examples shown in the previous section can be designed
using conventional circuit design tools such as EAGLE. However,
since Fibercuit also supports laser forming kirigami circuits, we
developed an alternative circuit design interface that incorporates
laser forming simulation. This is to help end-users to have a preview
of the folded circuits prior to fabrication.

7.1 Interface
The interface is written using the Three.js graphics library. Fig-
ure 16a shows the grid-based 2D canvas upon which the user can
draw three different types of edges: cutting edges, folding edges,
and circuit trace edges. Folding edges can be further subdivided into
mountain and valley edges, depending on the target angle at that

UIST ’22, October 29-November 2, 2022, Bend, OR, USA

Yan and Sathya, et al.

Figure 14: a) Demonstrating the small size of the circuit us-
ing a quarter. b) Shape of the earring when the circuit is ex-
panded. c) Showcasing the custom earring.

Figure 15: A kirigami crane fabricated using Fibercuit. Con-
tains a battery holder and 2 LEDs.

location. The user interface visually reflects the angles at folding
edges by increasing or decreasing the thickness of the correspond-
ing lines, depending on the magnitude of the angle.

In order to assist the user’s understanding of how the laser form-
ing will work, there is a 3D viewport included in the upper left
corner of the interface which shows the shape of the folded design
given the angles the user has set for each of the folding edges. This
helps to detect designs which are not foldable by a laser cutter due
to self-collisions or other issues.

The first step in creating a design, shown in figure 16b, is to create
an outline by placing points along the border of the overall shape of
the object. Cutting lines are automatically generated between these
points to create a closed polygon. Figure 16c displays the next step
of creating the folding edges between certain points in the outline.

Figure 16: User interface to design and simulate the folding
of a kirigami circuit.

This is accomplished by selecting points on the outline and using the
keyboard shortcut to “draw folding edge". To create a 3D, foldable
shape, these edges can have their angles set to values between
-90 and 90 degrees, depending on whether they are mountain or
valley edges. This is shown in figure 16d, along with the viewport
which reflects folding progress at different states using the slider.
Figure 16e shows that once a circuit outline is created, the user
can load electrical components represented as SVG footprints to
be placed onto the canvas. In order to connect two pads, a user
may create a new circuit trace line between them. The final design
which includes these traces is shown in Figure 16f.

7.2 Cutting Profile Generation
When the design is finalized, it can be exported as a multi-layer SVG
file which contains all the relevant information ready for cutting.
Lines are exported with related information such as edge type and
folding angle, and are stored in different layers of the SVG. The
layers are ordered the same as the cutting operations orders, based
on the algorithm presented in [14]. The SVG can be sent directly to
the fiber laser for circuit fabrication.

8 MACHINE AND PROCESS PARAMETERS
In this section we summarize the parameters of the machine and the
modifications that were made to enable our fabrication workflow.

8.1 Machine and its Add-ons
Figure 17a shows the fiber laser engraver machine used in the paper.
Figure 17 b shows the rotary clamping platform as a custom add-on.
The clamp holds the composite material sheet down and stretches it
in two orthogonal directions, ensuring the least amount of wrinkle

Fibercuit

UIST ’22, October 29-November 2, 2022, Bend, OR, USA

Table 1: Laser Engraving Parameters

technique

sub-division

speed
(mm/s)

Power
(%)

pass

cooling time
between pass (s)

profile

cutting isolation outline

0.03mm copper
0.05mm copper
0.1mm copper
0.15mm copper
0.2mm copper

cutting through

solder mask removal

–

–

through hole components
and via
SMD component with
extended solder pins
SMD components without
extended pin components

0.15mm copper
0.2mm copper

laser soldering

laser bending

500
500
200
100
60

100

500

200

500

500

100
100

Kapton removal

–

1000

60
60
60
60
60

100

30

100

20

30

45
42

25

14
25
14
15
28

20

3

50

5
10
10
15
15

outline of isolation area

no cooling

no cooling

no cooling

outline of hole, drill
and dimension

SMD & through-hole
solder pad area raster

0.1mm - 0.3mm
diameter circle

50x3

5s between sets

0.3mm square raster

100

no cooling

30
30

30

0.5
0.5

no cooling

0.3mm diameter hole
raster

bending hinge
bending hinge

Kapton under the
bending hinge

and buckling. 3D printed dowel pins minimize the calibration error
when the material has to be taken off the bed and put back in during
the manufacturing process. An integrated micro-controller is added
to digitally control the rotation of the platform for the laser to
perform dual-layer cutting and forming.

For example, inserting 15 dummy scans between engraving passes
generates 15s of cooling time.

The process parameters for major techniques are presented in
table 1, which includes parameters for cutting the conductor, laser
forming, laser soldering, cutting through the board stock and solder
mask removal.

Figure 17: a) Modified 50W fiber laser engraver. b) Custom
clamping platform.

8.2 Process Parameters
The process parameters mentioned in this paper are based on thor-
ough experimentation on the 50W laser engraver. They include
1) percentage of power: percentage of power out of 50w used in
engraving; 2) scanning speed: how fast the laser beam moves along
the irradiation path and 3) cooling time between paths. 1) and 2) can
be assigned to different profiles in the laser driver software with
trace color visualization similar to CO2 laser drivers. The cooling
time is implemented using a dummy scan — a 0% power 10 mm
long straight line segment passes with a fixed speed of 10 mm/s.

9 DISCUSSION
9.1 Effects of the Material Thickness
The thickness of the material influences the process parameters. The
required energy density is generally proportional to the thickness of
the conductor being used. This energy density can be increased by
reducing the speed of the laser, increasing the power, and increas-
ing the number of passes. This change in the process parameters
requires different considerations in the conducting layers and the
dielectric layers.

In order to accommodate laser forming, a thicker copper is pre-
ferred, as the temperature gradient mechanism performs better
when the ratio between the material thickness and the beam diam-
eter is higher. But when the energy density is increased, this leads
to higher carbonization of the silicone adhesive on the underside
of the Kapton.

As a result, in our experiments, to achieve a satisfactory trade-
off between the two, we relied on copper between 0.1mm and
0.15mm in thickness. This creates satisfactory insulation but also
allows various bending angles during laser forming. Further testing
on higher-powered fiber laser engravers may produce different
outcomes.

UIST ’22, October 29-November 2, 2022, Bend, OR, USA

Yan and Sathya, et al.

9.2 Copper Adhesion and Deterioration
Unlike an industrial method, the copper layer in Fibercuit is not
chemically adhered to the dielectric layer. As a result, over time,
traces with isolated and miniature footprints have the tendency
to peel away from the silicone adhesive. This effect can be seen
in Figure 5. The small pads on the ATMega168’s footprint that
are not connected to any trace are peeled away (Section 4.2). This
issue is not a hindrance in a rapid prototyping workflow, as it does
not affect the actual circuit functionalities. However, to support
long-term deployment, future research is needed on permanently
affixing the traces to the dielectric substrate.

9.3 N-layer Circuits
The current via design in our procedure only affords the fabrica-
tion of dual-layer circuits. We note that some work in this area
(e.g., [20]) has explored variations in via design, which could poten-
tially extend the Fibercuit procedure for n-layer circuits fabrication.
However, further explorations is needed to confirm the feasibility.

9.4 Through-Hole Components
In a standard PCB manufacturing process, the circuit board goes
through an additional electrolytic copper plating procedure that
deposits copper on plated through holes to interconnect between
the conductive layers. As this step is missing in our procedure,
through-hole components are soldered directly on the top layer of
the circuit, rather than the bottom. Although this does not heavily
affect a prototyping workflow, new designs on the via fabrication
process, as discussed in the previous section, might enable the
creation of interconnects in plated through holes.

9.5 Fabrcation Time
As mentioned in section 4.3, the fabrication time is mostly con-
founded by human operations instead of machine time. In future
work, we may explore automated techniques to reduce the manual
operation, e.g., selectively removing the conductive layer material to
substitute the manual peeling process, or adding a pick-and-place
mechanism to the machine to automate the laser soldering pro-
cess fully. With these in place, the fabrication time will be further
reduced.

10 CONCLUSION
We presented Fibercuit, a novel set of fabrication techniques for
making high-resolution, flexible, and kirigami circuits on-demand
using a fiber laser engraver. We presented the composition and
fabrication of custom copper-based composites and the laser cutting
techniques to form fine-pitch conductive traces from them. We also
discussed techniques that enable the fiber laser to solder small
surface-mount electrical components and the ability to laser form
kirigami circuits. Combined with our software pipeline, an end-user
can design and fabricate flexible circuits that are dual-layer and
kirigami circuits that can fit into a wide range of form factors.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Singh Sandbox at the University of Maryland for the
support on sample fabrication and video shooting. We also thank
reviewers for their valuable feedback.

REFERENCES
[1] Michael D. Bartlett, Eric J. Markvicka, and Carmel Majidi. 2016. Rapid Fabrication
of Soft, Multilayered Electronics for Wearable Biomonitoring. Advanced Func-
tional Materials 26, 46 (2016), 8496–8504. https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.201602733
arXiv:https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/adfm.201602733

[2] Create Printed Circuit Boards. [n.d.].

.

https://www.wikihow.com/Create-

Printed-Circuit-Boards

[3] Tingyu Cheng, Bu Li, Yang Zhang, Yunzhi Li, Charles Ramey, Eui Min Jung,
Yepu Cui, Sai Ganesh Swaminathan, Youngwook Do, Manos Tentzeris, et al.
2021. Duco: Autonomous Large-Scale Direct-Circuit-Writing (DCW) on Vertical
Everyday Surfaces Using A Scalable Hanging Plotter. Proceedings of the ACM on
Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 5, 3 (2021), 1–25.
[4] Tingyu Cheng, Koya Narumi, Youngwook Do, Yang Zhang, Tung D Ta, Takuya
Sasatani, Eric Markvicka, Yoshihiro Kawahara, Lining Yao, Gregory D Abowd,
et al. 2020. Silver tape: Inkjet-printed circuits peeled-and-transferred on versatile
substrates. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous
Technologies 4, 1 (2020), 1–17.

[5] Etching Flex Circuits. [n.d.]. . https://www.kobakant.at/DIY/?p=240
[6] Vmade CNC. [n.d.]. Desktop Fiber Laser Metal Marking Machine. https://www.
vmadecnc.com/mopa-fiber-laser-marker/58396932.html Accessed on 08.15.2021.
[7] S.P. Edwardson, J. Griffiths, G. Dearden, and K.G. Watkins. 2010. Temperature
gradient mechanism: Overview of the multiple pass controlling factors. Physics
Procedia 5 (2010), 53–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.phpro.2010.08.122 Laser As-
sisted Net Shape Engineering 6, Proceedings of the LANE 2010, Part 1.

[8] Besufekad N. Fetene, Uday S. Dixit, and João Paulo Davim. 2017. Laser-assisted
bending by magnetic force. The Journal of Engineering 2017, 7 (2017), 343–353.
https://doi.org/10.1049/joe.2017.0145

[9] Jun Gong, Olivia Seow, Cedric Honnet, Jack Forman, and Stefanie Mueller. 2021.
MetaSense: Integrating Sensing Capabilities into Mechanical Metamaterial. In
The 34th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology.
1063–1073.

[10] Nan-Wei Gong, Jürgen Steimle, Simon Olberding, Steve Hodges, Nicholas Ed-
ward Gillian, Yoshihiro Kawahara, and Joseph A Paradiso. 2014. PrintSense: a
versatile sensing technique to support multimodal flexible surface interaction. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
1407–1410.

[11] Daniel Groeger and Jürgen Steimle. 2018. ObjectSkin: augmenting everyday
objects with hydroprinted touch sensors and displays. Proceedings of the ACM on
Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 1, 4 (2018), 1–23.
[12] Daniel Groeger and Jürgen Steimle. 2019. Lasec: Instant fabrication of stretchable
circuits using a laser cutter. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems. 1–14.

[13] Yue Hao and Jyh-Ming Lien. 2019. Computational Laser Forming Origami of Con-
vex Surfaces. In Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on Computational Fabrication
(Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania) (SCF ’19). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, Article 9, 11 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3328939.3329006
[14] Yue Hao, Peiwen J Ma, Huaishu Peng, Edwin A Peraza Hernandez, and Jyh-
Ming Lien. 2021. Metal Blossom: Laser Forming Complex and Freeform Metal
Structures Imitating Flower Blooming. arXiv e-prints (2021), arXiv–2111.
[15] Felix Heibeck, Basheer Tome, Clark Della Silva, and Hiroshi Ishii. 2015. uniMorph:
Fabricating thin film composites for shape-changing interfaces. In Proceedings
of the 28th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software & Technology.
233–242.

[16] Freddie Hong, Connor Myant, and David E Boyle. 2021. Thermoformed Circuit
Boards: Fabrication of Highly Conductive Freeform 3D Printed Circuit Boards with
Heat Bending. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445469

[17] Ayaka Ishii, Kunihiro Kato, Kaori Ikematsu, Yoshihiro Kawahara, and Itiro Siio.
2022. CircWood: Laser Printed Circuit Boards and Sensors for Affordable DIY
Woodworking. In Sixteenth International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and
Embodied Interaction. 1–11.

[18] Hsin-Liu Kao, Christian Holz, Asta Roseway, Andres Calvo, and Chris Schmandt.
2016. DuoSkin: rapidly prototyping on-skin user interfaces using skin-friendly
materials. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM International Symposium on Wearable
Computers. 16–23.

[19] Yoshihiro Kawahara, Steve Hodges, Benjamin S Cook, Cheng Zhang, and Gre-
gory D Abowd. 2013. Instant inkjet circuits: lab-based inkjet printing to support
rapid prototyping of UbiComp devices. In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM interna-
tional joint conference on Pervasive and ubiquitous computing. 363–372.

Fibercuit

UIST ’22, October 29-November 2, 2022, Bend, OR, USA

Technology (Charlotte, NC, USA) (UIST ’15). Association for Computing Machin-
ery, New York, NY, USA, 253–258. https://doi.org/10.1145/2807442.2807503
[40] Martin Schmitz, Jan Riemann, Florian Müller, Steffen Kreis, and Max Mühlhäuser.
2021. Oh, Snap! A Fabrication Pipeline to Magnetically Connect Conventional and
3D-Printed Electronics. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA. https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445641

[41] Epilog Fusion Pro Series. [n.d.]. . https://www.epiloglaser.com/laser-machines/

fusion-pro-laser-series.htm

[42] Adam C Siegel, Scott T Phillips, Michael D Dickey, Nanshu Lu, Zhigang Suo, and
George M Whitesides. 2010. Foldable printed circuit boards on paper substrates.
Advanced Functional Materials 20, 1 (2010), 28–35.

[43] Saiganesh Swaminathan, Kadri Bugra Ozutemiz, Carmel Majidi, and Scott E. Hud-
son. 2019. FiberWire: Embedding Electronic Function into 3D Printed Mechanically
Strong, Lightweight Carbon Fiber Composite Objects. Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300797

[44] Bantam tools. [n.d.]. . https://www.bantamtools.com/
[45] Nobuyuki Umetani and Ryan Schmidt. 2017. SurfCuit: Surface-Mounted Circuits
IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 37, 3 (2017), 52–60.

on 3D Prints.
https://doi.org/10.1109/MCG.2017.40

[46] Guanyun Wang, Fang Qin, Haolin Liu, Ye Tao, Yang Zhang, Yongjie Jessica
Zhang, and Lining Yao. 2020. MorphingCircuit: An Integrated Design, Simulation,
and Fabrication Workflow for Self-Morphing Electronics. Proc. ACM Interact.
Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol. 4, 4, Article 157 (dec 2020), 26 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3432232

[47] Zhujiang Wang, Zimo Wang, Woo-Hyun Ko, Ashif Sikandar Iquebal, Vu Nguyen,
Nazanin Afsar Kazerooni, Qiyang Ma, Arun Srinivasa, Panganamala Ramana
Kumar, and Satish Bukkapatnam. 2022. An autonomous laser kirigami method
with low-cost real-time vision-based surface deformation feedback system. The
International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology 118, 5 (01 Jan 2022),
1873–1883. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-021-07661-8

[48] Martin Weigel, Tong Lu, Gilles Bailly, Antti Oulasvirta, Carmel Majidi, and Jürgen
Steimle. 2015. Iskin: flexible, stretchable and visually customizable on-body touch
sensors for mobile computing. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 2991–3000.

[49] Mark Weiser. 1991. The Computer for the 21 st Century. Scientific american 265,

3 (1991), 94–105.

[50] Michael Wessely, Ticha Sethapakdi, Carlos Castillo, Jackson C Snowden, Ollie
Hanton, Isabel PS Qamar, Mike Fraser, Anne Roudaut, and Stefanie Mueller.
2020. Sprayable user interfaces: Prototyping large-scale interactive surfaces with
sensors and displays. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems. 1–12.

[51] Yang Zhang, Gierad Laput, and Chris Harrison. 2017. Electrick: Low-cost touch
sensing using electric field tomography. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–14.

[52] Junyi Zhu, Lotta-Gili Blumberg, Yunyi Zhu, Martin Nisser, Ethan Levi Carlson,
Xin Wen, Kevin Shum, Jessica Ayeley Quaye, and Stefanie Mueller. 2020. Curve-
Boards: Integrating Breadboards into Physical Objects to Prototype Function in the
Context of Form. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
1–13. https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376617

[20] Mannu Lambrichts, Jose Maria Tijerina, Tom De Weyer, and Raf Ramakers.
2020. DIY Fabrication of High Performance Multi-Layered Flexible PCBs. In
Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference on Tangible, Embedded,
and Embodied Interaction (Sydney NSW, Australia) (TEI ’20). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 565–571. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3374920.3374988

[21] Nathan Lazarus, Sarah S. Bedair, Sami H. Hawasli, Myung Jun Kim,
Selective Electro-
Advanced Materials Technolo-
https://doi.org/10.1002/admt.201900126

Benjamin J. Wiley, and Gabriel L. Smith. 2019.
plating for 3D-Printed Electronics.
gies 4, 8 (2019), 1900126.
arXiv:https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/admt.201900126

[22] Nathan Lazarus, Adam A. Wilson, and Gabriel L. Smith. 2018. Contactless laser
fabrication and propulsion of freely moving structures. Extreme Mechanics Letters
20 (2018), 46–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eml.2018.01.003

[23] Joanne Lo and Eric Paulos. 2014. ShrinkyCircuits: Sketching, Shrinking, and
Formgiving for Electronic Circuits. In Proceedings of the 27th Annual ACM Sym-
posium on User Interface Software and Technology (Honolulu, Hawaii, USA)
(UIST ’14). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 291–299.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2642918.2647421

[24] Lpkf. [n.d.]. LPKF Promat Series. https://www.lpkf.com/
[25] Eric Markvicka, Guanyun Wang, Yi-Chin Lee, Gierad Laput, Carmel Majidi,
and Lining Yao. 2019. ElectroDermis: Fully Untethered, Stretchable, and Highly-
Customizable Electronic Bandages. Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300862

[26] David A. Mellis, Sam Jacoby, Leah Buechley, Hannah Perner-Wilson, and Jie Qi.
2013. Microcontrollers as Material: Crafting Circuits with Paper, Conductive Ink,
Electronic Components, and an "Untoolkit". In Proceedings of the 7th International
Conference on Tangible, Embedded and Embodied Interaction (Barcelona, Spain)
(TEI ’13). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 83–90.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2460625.2460638

[27] MGChemicals. [n.d.].

Sn42/Bi57/Ag1 Low Temperature Solder Paste.
https://www.mgchemicals.com/products/soldering-supplies/solder-paste/low-
temperature-solder/

[28] Stefanie Mueller, Bastian Kruck, and Patrick Baudisch. 2013. LaserOrigami:
Laser-Cutting 3D Objects. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (Paris, France) (CHI ’13). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2585–2592. https://doi.org/10.1145/2470654.
2481358

[29] Steven Nagels, Raf Ramakers, Kris Luyten, and Wim Deferme. 2018. Silicone
devices: A scalable DIY approach for fabricating self-contained multi-layered soft
circuits using microfluidics. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems. 1–13.

[30] Martin Nisser, Christina Chen Liao, Yuchen Chai, Aradhana Adhikari, Steve
Hodges, and Stefanie Mueller. 2021. LaserFactory: a laser cutter-based electrome-
chanical assembly and fabrication platform to make functional devices & robots.
In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on human factors in computing systems.
1–15.

[31] Simon Olberding, Sergio Soto Ortega, Klaus Hildebrandt, and Jürgen Steimle.
2015. Foldio: Digital fabrication of interactive and shape-changing objects with
foldable printed electronics. In Proceedings of the 28th Annual ACM Symposium
on User Interface Software & Technology. 223–232.

[32] Simon Olberding, Michael Wessely, and Jürgen Steimle. 2014. PrintScreen: fabri-
cating highly customizable thin-film touch-displays. In Proceedings of the 27th
annual ACM symposium on User interface software and technology. 281–290.
[33] Huaishu Peng, François Guimbretière, James McCann, and Scott Hudson. 2016.
A 3d printer for interactive electromagnetic devices. In Proceedings of the 29th
Annual Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology. 553–562.

[34] Varun Perumal and Daniel Wigdor. 2015. Printem: Instant Printed Circuit Boards

with Standard Office Printers & Inks.. In UIST. 243–251.

[35] Narjes Pourjafarian, Marion Koelle, Fjolla Mjaku, Paul Strohmeier, and Jürgen
Steimle. 2022. Print-A-Sketch: A Handheld Printer for Physical Sketching of
Circuits and Sensors on Everyday Surfaces. In CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems. ACM.

[36] Glowforge Printer. [n.d.]. . https://glowforge.com/our-products
[37] Valkyrie Savage, Ryan Schmidt, Tovi Grossman, George Fitzmaurice, and Björn
Hartmann. 2014. A Series of Tubes: Adding Interactivity to 3D Prints Using
Internal Pipes. In Proceedings of the 27th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface
Software and Technology (Honolulu, Hawaii, USA) (UIST ’14). Association for
https://doi.org/10.1145/
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 3–12.
2642918.2647374

[38] Valkyrie Savage, Xiaohan Zhang, and Björn Hartmann. 2012. Midas: fabricating
custom capacitive touch sensors to prototype interactive objects. In Proceedings
of the 25th annual ACM symposium on User interface software and technology.
579–588.

[39] Martin Schmitz, Mohammadreza Khalilbeigi, Matthias Balwierz, Roman Lisser-
mann, Max Mühlhäuser, and Jürgen Steimle. 2015. Capricate: A Fabrication
Pipeline to Design and 3D Print Capacitive Touch Sensors for Interactive Objects.
In Proceedings of the 28th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software &

