2
2
0
2

g
u
A
5
1

]
x
e
-
p
e
h
[

1
v
0
5
0
7
0
.
8
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

AE¯gIS: Status and Prospects

R. Caravita on behalf of the AEgIS collaboration
Trento Institute for Fundamental Physics and Applications,
via Sommarive 14, 38123 Povo (Tn), Italy

The progresses of the AE¯gIS collaboration on its way towards directly measuring the gravita-
tional free-fall of neutral antimatter atoms are reviewed. The experiment recently developed
the ﬁrst pulsed cold antihydrogen source and entered in its second phase, aiming at the ﬁrst
proof-of-concept gravitational measurement. Several major upgrades were deployed, including
an upgraded antihydrogen production scheme and a fully-redesigned antiproton trap. AE¯gIS
re-started its operation on the new CERN ELENA decelerator in late 2021, capturing its
ﬁrst antiprotons and commissioning its new antiproton energy degrading system and hard-
ware/software control systems.

1 Introduction

The main goal of the AE¯gIS experiment at CERN’s Antimatter Factory is to measure the
gravitational acceleration of antimatter atoms with a pulsed beam of cold antihydrogen ( ¯H) [1].
The method chosen by the collaboration is that of directly sampling the trajectory of free-falling
atoms both in space and time, so to invert their (newtonian) equation of motion ∆y ∝ ¯g ∆t2
to work out ¯g, Earth’s gravitational acceleration experienced by antihydrogen atoms. Time-
controlled antihydrogen production is realized by a charge-exchange process between trapped
antiprotons (¯p) and laser-excited Rydberg Positronium (Ps) atoms, whose cross-section is σCE ≈
10−15 nP s
4 cm2 and nP s is the principal quantum number of Rydberg Ps (Ps*, from now on)
[2]. Ps atoms are obtained by implanting bursts of keV positrons (e+) in a nanochanneled
mesoporous e+-Ps silica converter [3].

2 Review of AE¯gIS phase 1 results

During the ﬁrst phase of the project (lasting approximately until the end of 2018, see Figure 2)
AE¯gIS aimed at three main objectives: assess experimentally the eﬀectiveness of its selected
gravitational sensor, establish Ps* production in its 1 T magnetic ﬁeld environment, and use it
to ﬁrst produce ¯H in a pulsed fashion following its original charge-exchange scheme (see [1], also
shown in Figure 1, left).
First, the possibility to adopt a moir´e deﬂectometer (the classical counterpart of a Mach-Zehnder
interferometer) was investigated. keV ¯p were let go through a set of two 40 µm-period gratings
and detected by a nuclear emulsion detector [4]. Comparing the so-obtained ¯p fringe pattern
with a light reference, it was established that the device preserved its alignment in the cryogenic
vacuum of the experiment, and that forces down to the aN sensitivity could be measured on a
baseline of roughly 20 cm [5].
Second, Rydberg Ps production via two-step laser excitation in the 1 T magnetic (cid:126)B ﬁeld of the
experiment was realized. The maximum nP s that could be reached was nP s = 18 as, for higher

 
 
 
 
 
 
levels, signiﬁcant self-ionization of the atoms was observed. This resulted from the eﬀect of an
eﬀective electric ﬁeld experienced by the Ps* atoms in their co-moving frame of reference at
velocity (cid:126)vP s: the so-called motional Stark eﬀect, or (cid:126)EM S = (cid:126)vP s × (cid:126)B. This electric ﬁeld caused
eﬃcient ﬁeld-ionization of Ps* higher than a certain threshold: the maximum excitable nP s,
corresponding to a ﬁeld-ionization rate of ≈ 1 GHz, was nP s ≈ 600 (9 vP s B sin θ)−1/4 ≈ 19,
where θ = π/2 is the trajectory angle between the individual Ps* trajectories and the magnetic
ﬁeld. [6].
Last, a ﬁrst pulsed cold ¯H source was realized by letting nP s = 17 Ps* atoms impinge on a cloud of
≈ 106 ¯p at 400 K, held in a Malmberg-Penning trap with an entrance grid in the upper part of the
central electrode to let Ps* ﬂy through. ¯H formation was established by comparing ¯p annihilation
rates in the few µs after Ps* production with and without the presence of antiprotons, positrons
and the excitation laser. A signiﬁcant excess of annihilations when both antiprotons, positrons
and laser are enabled was observed, compatible with a production rate of 0.05 ¯H atoms per cycle
of the experiment (110 s) [7].

Figure 1 – Left: orthogonal ¯H production scheme of AE¯gIS Phase 1: here Rydberg Ps atoms (Ps*) propagate on
average orthogonal to the B ﬁeld orientation, incurring in the maximal motional Stark eﬀect (see text). Right:
collinear ¯H production scheme of AE¯gIS Phase 2: here the Ps* atoms propagate on average parallel to the B ﬁeld,
cancelling the motional Stark eﬀect.

3 AE¯gIS Phase 2

The success in realizing a ﬁrst ≈100 ns-pulsed cold ¯H source motivated the AE¯gIS collaboration
to continue its ¯H physics program for a second major phase of the experiment (Figure 2), whose
main goal is to achieve the ﬁrst proof-of-concept inertial measurement with pulsed ¯H. The
main limitations of the AE¯gIS phase 1 approach were identiﬁed to be the following: the ¯H
source intensity has to be increased by 2 ÷ 3 orders of magnitude; the temperature of the ¯p
plasma/produced ¯H atoms has to be reduced by 1 order of magnitude; the experiment should
be designed for the free-fall to take place in the most homogeneous magnetic ﬁeld region of the
experiment to limit systematic eﬀects due to the magnet fringe-ﬁeld. These sub-goals, together
with the experience gained in producing and exciting Ps* in high magnetic ﬁelds, led to a major
revision of the experimental scheme used to form ¯H.

A collinear production scheme (shown in Figure 1, right) is adopted for AE¯gIS phase 2,
where the e+-Ps silica converter target is installed on the same axis as that of the trap. This
scheme oﬀers several advantages, at the modest price of a limited opening loss in transmission.
First and foremost, the motional Stark eﬀect is cancelled to ﬁrst order in the trajectory angle θ,
as on average the Ps* atoms’ distribution has (cid:104)θ(cid:105) ≈ 0. This allows increasing nP s and excite Ps
to Rydberg levels as high as nP s = 32, being limited only by the second-order angular spread of
the distribution to cover eﬃciently the ¯p plasma in the trap: a cross-section gain of a factor of 16
is thus realized. Secondly, an up-to 50-fold increase in ¯p numbers is expected from the reduced

Figure 2 – Outlook on the AE¯gIS physics programs, underpinning the CERN decelerator schedules (ﬁrst row), the
leading antihydrogen physics program with its Phase 1 and Phase 2 (second row), and the seconday positronium
and antiprotonic ions physics programs (third and fourth row).

¯p energy of the ELENA accelerator with respect to the former Antiproton Decelerator, leading
to a much higher trapping eﬃciency [8]. Combining these two enhancements, the ¯H production
rate will be brought to 1 ÷ 10 atoms for every experiment cycle. Lastly, the ﬁnal trap of the
experiment was fully redesigned: to reduce the number of electrodes and liberate ≈ 20 cm of
ﬂight space for the deﬂectometer; to minimize the RF noise footprint on the electrodes; to enforce
a fully cylindrical symmetry and enhance the plasma stability; to embed an active alignment
system at cryogenic temperatures to accurately align its axis to that of the magnetic ﬁeld. These
upgrades are meant to reach the state-of-the-art plasma temperatures in traps of ≈ tens of K.

4 First antiprotons from ELENA

AE¯gIS restarted operation on October 20th, 2021, date on which the experiment took its ﬁrst
¯p beam from the ELENA decelerator, equipped with a fully upgraded trap electronics and
control system. This was a major upgrade step performed in 2020 (despite the diﬃculties
imposed by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic), consisting in the transition from a fully custom
solution to a semi-standard LabVIEW/ARTIQ/Sinara software/hardware ecosystem, featuring
the high ﬂexibility of the Python-like programming interface of ARTIQ, combined with the
ns-scale hardware synchronization capability of the Sinara hardware and with the solidity of a
distributed LabVIEW control system based on the Actor Model of concurrency.
The 2021 run allowed AE¯gIS to test its upgraded control system, upgraded energy degraders
and detection system. Antiprotons from ELENA were successfully imaged and steered on a
micro-channel plate detector (MCP) (Figure 3, right), which allowed careful determination of
the optimal beam steering for energy degrading. The energy degrading eﬀect from its overall
1600 nm thickness of Parylene N foils was observed, with ≈ 15% of the energy distribution of
¯p transmitted by the degrader lower than 10 keV, the threshold for trapping with the current
high-voltage electrodes [9]. The ﬁrst trapping of keV ¯p was achieved, as shown in Figure 3,
left. Trapped ¯p were held in the catching trap for a few seconds, before being slowly released
and imaged by a scintillation detector by ramping down the high-voltage trapping electrodes in
about 5 s.

5 Outlook and future prospects

AE¯gIS has recently entered in its second phase (see Figure 2), after the successful demonstration
of the ﬁrst pulsed source of cold ¯H, aiming at the ﬁrst proof-of-concept gravitational measurement
with antimatter atoms. In the near future, the collaboration aims at showing that an enhance-
ment in the ¯H atoms ﬂux from its source by up to a factor of 100 is possible, as well as reducing
the produced atoms’ temperature. As the following step, AE¯gIS aims at forward-boosting the
produced ¯H to ≈ 103 m s−1, by collectively accelerating the ¯p plasma right before the charge-
exchange occurs, to impress on the ¯p a common axial momentum that is then transferred to the

Figure 3 – Left: ﬁrst antiprotons caught by AE¯gIS from ELENA during the 2022 run. Antiprotons were held
in the trap for 5 s and released by turning oﬀ one of the two high-voltage electrodes used for capture, whose
potential decreases in about 5 s. Right: a micro-channel-plate (MCP) image of the primary ELENA beam, chosen
to emphasize the imaging capabilities of this detector to 100 keV antiproton annihilations.

¯H atoms. This will eﬀectively realize a pulsed, forward-boosted beam of transversally-cold ¯H,
the necessary ingredient for attempting a ﬁrst gravitational measurement, which is thus possible
in the mid future. The parallel development of a suitable deﬂectometer/interferometer is already
ongoing, to develop an instrument able to measure the tiny vertical deﬂection due to gravity:
δy ≈ 0.2 µm for 103 m s−1 ¯H in the 20 cm baseline available for the experiment.

Acknowledgments

This work was sponsored by the European’s Union Horizon 2020 research and innovation pro-
gram under the Marie Sklodowska Curie grant agreement No. 754496, FELLINI, by the Wolf-
gang Gentner Programme of the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (grant no.
05E18CHA and by Warsaw University of Technology within the Excellence Initiative: Research
University (IDUB) programme and the IDUB-POB-FWEiTE-1 project grant.

References

[1] G. Testera et al. (AEgIS collaboration). Hyperﬁne Interactions, 233:13–20, 2015.

[2] D. Krasnick´y, R. Caravita, C. Canali, and G. Testera. Phys. Rev. A, (94):022714, 2016.

[3] S. Mariazzi, R. Caravita et al. (AEgIS collaboration). J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys.,

54:085004, 2021.

[4] M. Kimura et al. (AEgIS collaboration). Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A,

(732):325–329, 2013.

[5] S. Aghion et al. (AEgIS collaboration). Nat. Commun., 5:4538, 2014.

[6] M. Antonello et al. (AEgIS collaboration). Phys. Rev. A, 102:013101, 2020.

[7] C. Amsler et al. (AEgIS collaboration). Commun. Phys., 4:19, 2021.

[8] M. Doser et al. (AEgIS collaboration). Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A, 376:20170274, 2018.

[9] M. Doser et al. (AEgIS collaboration). AEgIS / AD-6 annual report 2022. Technical Report

SPSC-SR-303. CERN-SPSC-2022-004, CERN, Geneva, Jan 2022.

