2
2
0
2

g
u
A
8
1

]
E
S
.
s
c
[

1
v
1
7
6
8
0
.
8
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Understanding the Implementation of Technical Measures in the
Process of Data Privacy Compliance: A Qualitative Study

Oleksandra Klymenko
Technical University of Munich
Garching, Bavaria, Germany
alexandra.klymenko@tum.de

Oleksandr Kosenkov
fortiss GmbH
Munich, Bavaria, Germany
kosenkov@fortiss.org

Parisa Elahidoost
fortiss GmbH
Munich, Bavaria, Germany
elahidoost@fortiss.org

Daniel Mendez
Blekinge Institute of Technology
Karlskrona, Sweden
daniel.mendez@bth.se

Stephen Meisenbacher
Technical University of Munich
Garching, Bavaria, Germany
stephen.meisenbacher@tum.de

Florian Matthes
Technical University of Munich
Garching, Bavaria, Germany
matthes@tum.de

ABSTRACT
Background: Modern privacy regulations, such as the General
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), address privacy in software
systems in a technologically agnostic way by mentioning general
"technical measures" for data privacy compliance rather than dic-
tating how these should be implemented. An understanding of the
concept of technical measures and how exactly these can be han-
dled in practice, however, is not trivial due to its interdisciplinary
nature and the necessary technical-legal interactions.

Aims: We aim to investigate how the concept of technical mea-
sures for data privacy compliance is understood in practice as well
as the technical-legal interaction intrinsic to the process of imple-
menting those technical measures.

Methods: We follow a research design that is 1) exploratory
in nature, 2) qualitative, and 3) interview-based, with 16 selected
privacy professionals in the technical and legal domains.

Results: Our results suggest that there is no clear mutual under-
standing and commonly accepted approach to handling technical
measures. Both technical and legal roles are involved in the imple-
mentation of such measures. While they still often operate in sep-
arate spheres, a predominant opinion amongst the interviewees is
to promote more interdisciplinary collaboration.

Conclusions: Our empirical ﬁndings conﬁrm the need for bet-
ter interaction between legal and engineering teams when imple-
menting technical measures for data privacy. We posit that inter-
disciplinary collaboration is paramount to a more complete under-
standing of technical measures, which currently lacks a mutually
accepted notion. Yet, as strongly suggested by our results, there is
still a lack of systematic approaches to such interaction. Therefore,
the results strengthen our conﬁdence in the need for further inves-
tigations into the technical-legal dynamic of data privacy compli-
ance.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ESEM ’22, September 19–23, 2022, Helsinki, Finland
© 2022 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9427-7/22/09. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3544902.3546234

CCS CONCEPTS
• Security and privacy → Privacy protections.

KEYWORDS
data privacy, privacy compliance, GDPR, technical measures

ACM Reference Format:
Oleksandra Klymenko, Oleksandr Kosenkov, Stephen Meisenbacher, Parisa
Elahidoost, Daniel Mendez, and Florian Matthes. 2022. Understanding the
Implementation of Technical Measures in the Process of Data Privacy Com-
pliance: A Qualitative Study. In ACM / IEEE International Symposium on
Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement (ESEM) (ESEM ’22), Sep-
tember 19–23, 2022, Helsinki, Finland. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 12 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3544902.3546234

1 INTRODUCTION
In recent years, regulators around the world have been active in
enacting new privacy regulations, mainly motivated by the rapid
advancements in software systems and their data processing ca-
pacities. Still, many regulations such as GDPR, the California Con-
sumer Privacy Act (CCPA), and the older Healthcare Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) are "technology neu-
tral", in the sense that they abstract away from the technology to be
regulated [14]. Hence, these regulations do not prescribe explicit
requirements for the implementation of speciﬁc technologies [11]
that would render the ﬁnal software-intensive products compliant.
The rationale for technology neutrality is to allow for ﬂexibility
of regulatory frameworks and to accommodate future technolog-
ical developments. This comes at the price of the absence of con-
crete speciﬁcations for the implementation of regulatory norms via
"technical measures" (i.e. in GDPR).

The handling of technical measures in practice, i.e. their inter-
pretation, translation to requirements, and their implementation,
can raise various challenges. For example, according to Smith et
al. [22], three years after the GDPR came into eﬀect, one of the
main GDPR-related challenges of day-to-day operations in organi-
zations is the implementation of requirements into multiple sys-
tems. In GDPR, the term "technical measures" is written into the
letter of the law as an umbrella term that covers multiple measures
and principles. Such technical measures are dispersed in the text of
GDPR and can be identiﬁed directly (for example, the principles of
data protection by design or the need for pseudonymization). Huth

 
 
 
 
 
 
ESEM ’22, September 19–23, 2022, Helsinki, Finland

Klymenko et al.

et al. [13] identiﬁed 8 such technical measures and their proper-
ties in GDPR and established their deﬁnitions based on GDPR, ISO
27000:2018, and research publications on privacy terminology. Still,
the identiﬁcation of such measures as shown in [13] requires at
least profound knowledge of GDPR and auxiliary relevant sources.
On the other hand, technical measures need to be identiﬁed and
implemented even if GDPR does not expound upon them directly.
Regulators emphasized this by using the term “appropriate” in re-
lation to technical measures. Still, deciphering "appropriateness"
alone can require an academic level legal inquiry [20]. In this light,
it is reasonable to assume that understanding technical measures
for data privacy compliance requires at least domain knowledge
and legal expertise in software engineering teams. Available empir-
ical research in the domain of regulatory compliance of software
systems has shown that software engineers cannot independently
cope with complexities, and legal experts’ support can be impor-
tant [17]. Other research in the data privacy domain also suggested
that the involvement of legal experts is often required whereas the
interaction between both legal experts and software engineering
teams is often cumbersome [24] and challenging [26].

The importance of such technical-legal interaction cannot be
underestimated, as it heavily inﬂuences the design of a software
system and eventually dictates its compliance (assurance). While
the research community has already pointed to technical-legal in-
teractions as an important aspect of technical measures implemen-
tation, little is yet known about the way in which technical mea-
sures are really understood and implemented in practice. The lack
of understanding of this interaction may result in ineﬃcient prac-
tices.

The investigation of the technical-legal interaction is challeng-
ing as it requires one to consider both engineering and legal per-
spectives. This investigation represents an important research gap,
as pointed out by Altman et al. [2], namely that “legal and technical
approaches to data protection have developed in parallel, and their
conceptual underpinnings are growing increasingly divergent”.

In this paper, we contribute an interview study to explore legal
and engineering practitioners’ perspective on technical measures
for data privacy as well as their implementation in practice with
a speciﬁc focus on the interaction between legal and engineering
roles. We deliberately chose to focus on "technical measures" as
this term enables systematic investigation and integration of both
technical and legal perspectives.

As such, we ﬁrst aim to investigate the current understanding
of the processes that take place in order to implement technical
measures for data privacy compliance in practice. In supplement,
we explore the structures existing to facilitate such processes, par-
ticularly the roles and interactions therein. We base this approach
upon the hypothesis that in order to begin to understand “tech-
nical measures”, one must ﬁrst look behind the curtains to the
ecosystem of roles, interactions, and decisions deﬁned and exist-
ing within the process of data privacy compliance.

In the following, we ﬁrst lay the terminological foundation (Sec-
tion 2) and discuss work related to our research (Section 3) before
introducing the followed research methodology in Section 4. In
Section 5, we present our results and critically reﬂect upon them
in Section 6. In Section 7, we discuss selected threats to validity
before concluding our paper in Section 8.

2 FUNDAMENTALS AND BACKGROUND
2.1 Regulation and Data Privacy Compliance
When one looks at the legal side of privacy, the response has largely
come in the form of regulations. In some places, it is even named a
fundamental right by law. The understanding that privacy is a fun-
damental right is not novel, yet earlier notions of this right evolve
around the “limitation of governmental power” [19]. With modern
regulations, the discussion has shifted to that of data privacy.

The General Data Protection Regulation1, often shortened to
GDPR, is touted as “the toughest privacy and security law in the
world”, having implications far beyond the borders of the Euro-
pean Union as it applies to any entity collecting or processing data
that originates from within the EU. Goddard [8] reinforces this no-
tion of the “wide jurisdictional scope” of GDPR. In this paper, we
directly focus on one of its most interesting aspects, and arguably
one that makes GDPR so relevant - Data Privacy Compliance.

Of course, compliance of software-intensive products to legal
regulation is nothing new. The novelty introduced by GDPR comes
ﬁrstly with the widespread applicability and enforceability result-
ing from its nature as an EU-wide regulation. This concerns the
protection of data privacy in an age of increasing data utilization,
which certainly amounted to quite the change. Such novel scope is
captured in works such as de Hert et al. [7].

As such, GDPR introduced a new urgency to the demonstra-
tion of privacy compliance, with the possibility of rather signiﬁ-
cant ﬁnes in the event of non-compliance. One study by Wolﬀ et al.
[25] of GDPR ﬁnes up until 2019 found that “the largest volume of
ﬁnes... were levied due to violations in which organizations imple-
mented “insuﬃcient technical and organizational measures to en-
sure information security,” totaling some 59 ﬁnes that amounted to
€332,864,417”. This highlights the new pressure placed on data pro-
cessors to implement the appropriate “technical measures”. Recent
works such as Chhetri et al. [5] highlight the persistent challenges
of compliance veriﬁcation at scale and interoperability introduced
by the “paradigm shift in data protection” created by GDPR.

It is important to note that GDPR is by no means the only rel-
evant regulation. In an interesting and possibly foreseeable way,
many of the newest regulations around the globe certainly take in-
spiration “in the wake of GDPR” [9], further pointing to the mon-
umental impact of this single regulation.

2.2 Technical Measures
The idea of “technical measures” is clearly central to the work pre-
sented here, yet it is nevertheless a bit unclear what exactly might
be meant by this. The term is quite unambiguous in the sense that
technical measures call for ways in which technology can be used
for the purposes of data protection. Beyond that, though, techni-
cal measures can presumably take many forms, yet the general un-
derstanding of such measures remains vague and is not yet well
explored by the research community.

There has been work, mostly on the level of national supervi-
sory authorities, to attempt to clear up the technical side of pri-
vacy compliance via the release of overarching “guidelines”. Those

1https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32016R0679

Understanding the Implementation of Technical Measures in the Process of Data Privacy Compliance: A Qualitative Study ESEM ’22, September 19–23, 2022, Helsinki, Finland

guidelines provide a valuable ﬁrst step towards privacy compli-
ance. More importantly, and something that may lie at the core
of some challenges to be explored in this paper, the text of the Ger-
man Standard Data Protection Model (SDM)2 acknowledges that
regulation cannot be:

"...readily operationalised in a technical manner. Lawyers
and computer scientists must therefore ﬁnd a com-
mon language to ensure that the legal requirements
are actually implemented technically."

Despite this common understanding, the technical measures for
data privacy compliance are not covered thoroughly in the avail-
able guidelines. Exploring the crux of this statement becomes the
focal point of this work, lying at the intersection of technical and
legal perspectives on privacy compliance.

3 RELATED WORK
Software engineering research related to the implementation of
technical measures for data privacy compliance can be mainly found
in the ﬁelds of privacy engineering and regulatory requirements
engineering, both of which are inherently interdisciplinary [10,
15].

There are discrepancies in the research focusing on privacy in a
broad sense and compliance to GDPR or other privacy regulations.
Usually, privacy engineering research has a broader scope focusing
on the development of "privacy friendly systems" that among other
goals includes the fulﬁlment of privacy-related user expectations
[23], rather than simply achieving regulatory compliance.

Zimmermann [26] suggested a privacy engineering reference
process as a basis for automation. The reference model includes
legal tasks (e.g., identiﬁcation of applicable regulations, etc.), but
there is no separate explicit category of legal tasks. The author
mentions that such legal tasks require interpretation and case-speciﬁc
balancing. That makes them less suitable candidates for full au-
tomation. The author also does not further elaborate on the diﬀer-
entiation between engineering and legal tasks, the way interaction
should be organized, or the roles that should be involved.

There also exist various empirical studies related to regulatory
compliance of software systems overall and to GDPR in particular.
For instance, Massey et al. [16] investigated ambiguities in regula-
tory norms and suggested a strategy to address them. They found
that while software engineers can successfully identify such ambi-
guities, they still require further support or legal expertise to re-
solve them. The authors also suggested that the division of labor
is required to address legal ambiguities eﬀectively. Organization of
such division of labor was not in the scope of their work. Maxwel
et al. [17] also investigated the ability of software engineers to ad-
dress legal cross-references, and they concluded that engineers are
ill equipped to do it without any legal expert support.

Sirur et al. [21] conducted an interview study in order to reveal
challenges in compliance with the GDPR. Their results showed
that more technically focused respondents expressed the opinion
that the average engineer would struggle to apply the regulations
directly without support from a legal expert. These ﬁndings are
well aligned with the empirical research by Alhazmi et al. [1] on
the implementation of GDPR by software engineers. In their study,

2https://www.datenschutzzentrum.de/uploads/sdm/SDM-Methodology_V2.0b.pdf

they found that the majority of software engineers seem to believe
that data privacy compliance was not their responsibility and some
of them expressed an opinion that there should be a separate team
responsible for data privacy.

Finally, while works such as by Altman et al. [2] acknowledge
the divergence between technical and legal perspectives on pri-
vacy compliance, they do not place a particular focus on techni-
cal measures as the junction point. Furthermore, the process, roles,
and interactions surrounding technical measures are likewise not
addressed. Similarly, in the work of Piras et al. [18], the authors
support the notion that the GDPR lacks “providing details concern-
ing technical and organizational privacy and security measures
needed, and therefore it is diﬃcult for organizations to be fully
GDPR compliant”.

As shown, multiple publications highlight the need for technical-
legal interaction. Still, there is no one systematic understanding of
it based on the practice of the implementation of technical mea-
sures for data privacy compliance.

4 RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
In this section, we introduce the research methodology followed
in our interview study.

4.1 Goal and Research Questions
In our study, we aim to explore the implementation of technical
measures for data privacy compliance in practice, from the perspec-
tive of both legal and engineering professionals. A speciﬁc focus is
on the interaction between legal and engineering roles.

From our goal, we infer three major research questions (RQs):
RQ 1 How are technical measures for data privacy compliance un-

derstood in practice?

RQ 2 Which roles and responsibilities are involved in the imple-

mentation of technical measures?

RQ 3 What interactions are shared in practice between the tech-
nical and legal proponents of data privacy compliance?
The ﬁrst question aims to understand practitioners’ perceptions
of “technical measures” in their individual organizational context.
The second research question is then geared towards the processes
put in place for the implementation of technical measures, and the
roles that are deﬁned therein. Finally, under the umbrella of the
third research question, we aim to explore the interactions that
take place in these processes. As a result, we hope not only to gain
a static picture of what technical measures are understood to be,
but also to understand the dynamics taking place when handling
technical measures in software engineering processes.

4.2 Research Process
We follow a qualitative research approach by conducting semi-structured
interviews, thus drawing from the experiences and expertise of
participants working with privacy in either the legal or techni-
cal sectors, or ideally ones that traverse both ﬁelds. For this study,
we draw from the Grounded Theory methodology as described by
Hoda et al. [12]. In particular, we followed the approach of ﬁrst pre-
senting a pre-deﬁned set of questions to our interview participants,
with the goal of understanding their roles, responsibilities, interac-
tions, and future goals regarding privacy compliance within their

ESEM ’22, September 19–23, 2022, Helsinki, Finland

Klymenko et al.

organizations and/or ﬁelds. We then recorded and transcribed the
interviews, coding and constantly comparing the results of each
interview, until we reached a saturation that allowed us to close
the interview study. We conducted a total of 16 interviews.

Although the interviewees allowed for the ﬁndings to be pub-
lished, they did not agree to disclose the full transcriptions. There-
fore, in the interest of privacy, these are not included.

Identifying Participants. For the process of identifying inter-

4.2.1
viewees, the source of contacts was limited to four avenues:

• Personal contacts: people who could be immediately contacted

as a result of a shared connection

• Pre-saved contacts: i.e. from the work of previous research,

in which contact lists were created

• Top search results: i.e. via LinkedIn, where terms such as ’pri-
vacy professional’, ’privacy engineer’, ’data protection oﬃ-
cer’, or ’data privacy lawyer’ were entered

• Referrals: once initial interviews were conducted, people re-
ferred to within these could then be contacted, now with a
shared point of reference

Once these contacts were identiﬁed, several steps were followed
to initiate contact, present the opportunity for an interview, and
schedule the interview. The basic process is as follows:

(1) Informally ask for an interview (e.g. LinkedIn direct mes-

sage)

(2) Follow-up/send a formal email invitation, outlining the pur-

pose of the research and structure of the interview

(3) Schedule the interview
(4) Before the interview, provide the set of questions so that the

interviewee can prepare his or her responses

Particularly with the last point, this step was seen as necessary
due to the nature of the semi-structured interviews. Since the in-
terviewee was provided with the questions beforehand, the gen-
eral ﬂow of the interview would be known in advance, allowing
for impromptu follow-up questions and deeper discussions.

This approach for participant selection was viewed to be in line
with the goal to obtain diﬀerent perspectives from privacy profes-
sionals, both legal and technical. By searching for roles precon-
ceived to be involved with the compliance process, the interview
pool could be molded in an opportunistic, yet strategic manner.

4.2.2
Interviewee Demographics. Table 1 presents a codiﬁed table
of our sample including the interview participants’ relevant infor-
mation, such as unique interviewee codes that will be referenced
throughout in order to cite speciﬁc statements or express a par-
ticular opinion held by the respective interviewee. Codes suﬃxed
with a ’T’ denote a technical contact, ’L’ a legal, and ’LT’ a tech-
nical/legal contact. “Exp.” denotes years of experience. In cases
where the interviewee has longer relevant experience in the tech-
nical or legal ﬁelds, and later on began working as a privacy pro-
fessional, the number of years worked as a privacy professional is
indicated in the parentheses. “Dur.” denotes the duration of the
interview.

The interviews consisted of 11 male and 5 female interviewees,
from organizations spanning three continents. Another pertinent
demographic is the 154 cumulative years of experience shared amongst
the interviewees: 76 of these come pre-GDPR, and the remaining

78 post-GDPR. This is interesting to note as the perception of tech-
nical measures might very well be inﬂuenced by viewpoints taken
prior to the adoption of GDPR while the inﬂuence of GDPR will
most certainly also be heavily reﬂected.

4.2.3
Instrumentation. We developed an interview guideline based
on the research questions provided in Section 4.1. The guideline
consists of diﬀerent sections: First, general questions about the par-
ticipants’ backgrounds are considered. The next section includes
questions that inquire about the process of regulation identiﬁca-
tion and interpretation, based on the interviewees’ experiences and
understanding. Furthermore, our participants were asked to dis-
cuss the strategies and tools that they use for the implementation
of the identiﬁed privacy regulation. The ﬁnal part investigates rec-
ommendations and future directions.

4.2.4 Coding Process. The results of the interviews were coded in
accordance with the guidelines of a Thematic Content Analysis [3].
In our data analysis, we followed the ensuing steps:

(1) Transcript reading – reviewing the conducted interview
(2) Transcript annotation – highlighting important words,

phrases, points, etc. in the raw transcripts

(3) Data conceptualization – creating common themes and

codes based upon the annotated transcript data

(4) Data segmentation – marking the transcripts according
to category (each highlighted segment receives a code)
(5) Veriﬁcation – validating if the themes accurately depict

the transcript data

(6) Analysis and Results – writing a summary of the inter-
view with the help of the annotated transcripts and its
themes

5 STUDY RESULTS
In the following, we present the results of our study, structured
according to the research questions.

5.1 Practical Understanding of "Technical

Measures" (RQ 1)

In the interviews, the approach towards answering our ﬁrst re-
search question was carried out by posing the following question
to the interviewees: What is your understanding of the “technical
measures” required to comply with privacy regulations? The ﬁnd-
ings from the responses to this question are presented, and above
all, they call for an interesting analysis, not only in the content it-
self, but also by placing the responses in juxtaposition. Concretely,
the foremost striking characteristic of the responses is the clear
lack of uniformity. These various directions are introduced in the
following.

The idea of technical measures as a risk assessment was rein-
forced quite often by the interviewees. I3-L provides a clear deﬁni-
tion of technical measures as the “methods and processes we are
going to put in place, from an organizational corporate standpoint,
to reduce risk”. Interestingly, such a deﬁnition strays away from
the technical aspect of the term in question, instead focusing on
measures taken to address risk from an organizational viewpoint.
Another interviewee, I7-L, poses the ﬂip side of the coin, claiming
that one is “taking risks” if the correct technical measures are not

Understanding the Implementation of Technical Measures in the Process of Data Privacy Compliance: A Qualitative Study ESEM ’22, September 19–23, 2022, Helsinki, Finland

Participant
ID

Position

Table 1: Interview Study Participants

Organization

Exp.

Dur.

I1-T

I2-T

I3-L

I4-T

Privacy Engineer

Large US media conglomerate

Privacy/Security Architect

Large German multinational software corporation

Privacy and cybersecurity lawyer

US law ﬁrm

Privacy Engineer

Large US multinational tech company

I5-LT

DPO, Managing Director

Small German-based data protection software company

I6-T

I7-L

I8-L

I9-T

Software Architect

Lawyer/external DPO

Large German multinational tech conglomerate

Small German data privacy company

Group Data Protection Counsel

International ﬁnancial technology corporation

Privacy Engineer

I10-LT

Legal Counsel

Large US Tech Corporation

Global Web Consortium

I11-L

I12-L

I13-T

I14-L

I15-T

I16-L

Legal Counsel

DPO

German-based digital privacy consulting ﬁrm

German-based consulting ﬁrm

Security and Privacy Architect

Large German multinational tech conglomerate

Compliance Oﬃcer

Privacy Engineer

Legal Associate

British-based news corporation

Chinese multinational tech corporation

Indian-based law ﬁrm

10+ (1)

6

20+

5+ (4)

4

3

20+

6

8

25

3

20 (3)

3

3

15

3

54

52

32

70

50

50

55

60

65

60

50

55

60

50

60

55

in place. Combining these two ideas, I9-T talks of using technical
measures as a way to “mitigate privacy risks”. In this light, one may
understand technical measures to be actions that serve to mitigate
privacy risks, according to the risk assessment (and tolerance) of a
particular organization.

Of course, even this risk assessment may diﬀer greatly amongst
organizations. An interesting factor relating to this notion is brought
to light by I3-L, who emphasizes the cultural factor of risk assess-
ments when it comes to technical measures. Essentially, there are
two ﬁelds of thought on the matter. The ﬁrst abstracts from the
rigidity of a term like technical measures, and essentially boils pri-
vacy compliance down to risk reduction. The other perspective,
following the “letter of the law”, indeed focuses on technical mea-
sures, for “if the law says that we should implement technical mea-
sures, we will implement technical measures” (I3-L). In the end, the
distinction lies within the decision over whether technical mea-
sures must be exactly that, or rather if technical (and organiza-
tional) measures represent a matter of interpretation, or “degrees
of freedom” (I2-T).

To the latter point of view, responses to the question also fo-
cused on the purely technical aspect of the technical measures in
question. I5-LT mentions that “hardware or software installations”
must be put into place in order to prevent privacy breaches. On the
consulting side, there may often be checklists utilized in order to
understand the technical systems in play, so as to begin to tackle
the implementation of technical measures. For some interviewees,
technical measures go hand in hand with encryption, which cer-
tainly would fall under the umbrella of the term. Interestingly, the
frequent mention of encryption may not come as a surprise, for it

counts as one of the rare cases of technologies explicitly mentioned
in the text of GDPR. Likewise, I16-L makes mention of anonymiza-
tion (also in GDPR), and I12-L points to other measures such as a
data intrusion detection system. As one may extract from such re-
sponses, the idea of technical measures is quite varied, even when
conﬁned to the strictly technical sense.

This non-uniformity comes as a particular issue for some inter-
viewees, who see this ﬂexibility as a challenge. I2-L is sometimes
perplexed by “multiple options” for technical measures, or rather,
the “it depends” scenarios. This is echoed by I6-T, who views the
implementation of technical measures as a “broad question, and it
has multiple layers of answers to it”. From a legal perspective, the
lack of clarity on technical measures “creates a lot of issues and
a lot of problems and a lot of headaches” (I8-L). Beyond this, I8-L
believes that technical measures include other actions “that might
not be listed explicitly as sort of technical measures but are good
on the regulation side”, further muddying the waters in the under-
standing of technical measures.

The legal perspective provides a hint of clarity on the matter,
with regards to the discussion of data ﬂow. A simple set of ques-
tions becomes: “What do you do with the data? What kind of data
do you have?” (I8-L). In this light, the securing of data becomes
a focal point of technical measures. Another deﬁnition of techni-
cal measures comes from I16-L as “multiple measures to be taken
by the organization as far as like what type of practices they do
with the data”, thus enabling the organization to “deﬁne the data
ﬂow”. With this, though, I8-L reminds us that “there will always
be diﬀerent data elements, diﬀerent kinds of sensitivity of the data,

ESEM ’22, September 19–23, 2022, Helsinki, Finland

Klymenko et al.

diﬀerent infrastructures in place”, which forces the notion of tech-
nical measures to retain in part its ﬂexible nature.

Of particular interest to the technical aspect is the question of
how Privacy-Enhancing Technologies (PETs) ﬁt into the discussion
of technical measures for privacy compliance. I2-T references spe-
ciﬁc examples such as Homomorphic Encryption and Diﬀerential
Privacy, yet the challenge there becomes whether one can “claim to
have any beneﬁt”, in regards to the demonstration of compliance
(and avoidance of ﬁnes), from using “the most sound techniques”,
i.e. PETs. This highlights the issue that although PETs may be tech-
nically sound in regards to privacy preservation, their adoption
for compliance purposes is unclear. In the same discussion, I2-T
makes this issue concrete by saying “the mapping is not yet very
clear”. Another viewpoint on this matter comes from I4-T, who
says that the decision to implement PETs comes from “high up”,
implying that the decision to interpret PETs as appropriate tech-
nical measures is one left to upper management. A ﬁnal insight
into the understanding of PETs of technical measures comes from
I9-T, who believes that many PETs are currently “too academic” to
be applicable as technical measures. This rehashes the importance
of education and awareness in enabling the adoption of PETs in
real-world scenarios, that is, outside of the academic sphere.

In a similar way, the signiﬁcance of automation in the process
of data privacy compliance is something that was inquired about.
However, the collective response was not entirely thorough, often
amounting to agreement with the fact that automation could be
helpful in the process, but is currently not being utilized.

Another important aspect to the discussion of technical mea-
sures comes with a retort from the technical viewpoint, expressed
with the statement: “there’s a very big diﬀerence between a legal
analysis or assessment and a technical privacy implementation”
(I9-T). This is echoed and even complicated a bit by I9-T: “It is even
more important than just the technical”. Thus, in the conversation
on the understanding of technical measures and their implementa-
tion for privacy compliance, the scope is expanded to external fac-
tors. The statement by I9-T suggests that the discrepancy between
legal mandate and technical implementation may be complicating
the current understanding of “technical measures” for legal com-
pliance. Even within the technical sphere, I4-T reminds us that al-
though a technical measure may in some cases be relatively simple
to implement, there are complicating factors in the maintenance of
such measures, including the tracking of data ﬂow.

Parallel to the understanding of technical measures in practice,
the larger scope of the privacy compliance process must also be
taken into consideration. In particular, the concept of enforceabil-
ity becomes crucial, per I10-LT. Requiring technical measures to
take “due regard to the state of the art” (GDPR) is not only inher-
ently vague, but it may also lead organizations “to unproportion-
ally invest to achieve compliance” (I10-LT). This problem is only
exacerbated if the enforcement of data privacy compliance is not
clear. Thus, if the “rule of law is not existing, we are in this kind of
foggy environment” (I10-LT). This without a doubt plays a signiﬁ-
cant role in the perception of technical measures.

The inquiry into a practical understanding of technical mea-
sures for privacy compliance certainly elicited rich and varied re-
sponses. As such, the further discussion of the ﬁndings introduced
here is merited (Section 6). Before this, we explore the context

surrounding this discussion, namely the role and interactions in-
volved in the implementation of technical measures for privacy
compliance.

RQ1: The inquiry into understanding technical measures
elicited varied responses, pointing to their complex nature.

5.2 Structure of the Technical Measures
Implementation Process (RQ 2)

In order to understand the process behind the implementation of
technical measures to enable data privacy compliance, it is ﬁrst
necessary to identify the involved parties and their individual re-
sponsibilities. Through the interviews, we extracted these based on
the interviewees’ descriptions of their roles and responsibilities as
well as their interactions with other roles involved in the process
of data privacy compliance (the latter is covered in Section 5.3).

Legal side. The ﬁrst party involved on the legal side of the
5.2.1
process is the Legal Team, or Legal Counsel – a group of practic-
ing lawyers and/or legal associates specializing in sub-ﬁelds such
as privacy, data protection and cybersecurity. Larger organizations
might have in-house counsel and internal legal team(s), while smaller
organizations or ones where the constant availability of legal sup-
port is not necessarily needed often use outside / external counsel.
The responsibility of the legal counsel is to provide interpretation
of the relevant regulations to other (non-legal) parties to develop
and maintain compliant systems: “Legal interprets everything. . .
their job is to make sure we’re staying up to date, trying to be
compliant.” (I1-T). The job of outside counsel is virtually identical:
“We’re outside counsel, which means that we advise clients on the
legal requirements.” (I3-L). Again, this emphasizes the advisory na-
ture of legal support, that is the guidance provided by lawyers as
the interpreters of laws and regulations.

Also under the legal category but strictly distinct from legal
counsel is the role of an External Consultant. This person is most
often involved with small and mid-sized organizations and is “spe-
cialized in providing support on privacy topics” (I7-L), especially
including compliance. Consultants “support and consult with com-
panies that want to process data of individuals. . . to make sure that
the client is really handling the data in a legal matter, and in a se-
cure space” (I11-L). Crucial to note is that for external consultants
there is no expectation that the consultant is a practicing lawyer.
Furthermore, this rarely seems to be the case; of the interviewees
working in this role, none were lawyers. From this fact comes the
true distinction between somewhat overlapping roles of legal coun-
sel and external consultant – under the eyes of the law, legal ad-
vice provided by a practicing lawyer cannot be replaced by that of
a consultant.

The role of Compliance Oﬃcer is quite unique in the sense that
it is not a strictly legal role, rather, “It’s a bit more on the legal side
of it, without stepping too far into legal because we do have a le-
gal team... we’re simply there for the operational risk, and really
deciding what that risk is meant to look like for us.” (I14-L). This ex-
planation introduces the extremely vital concept of "go-betweens"
in the data privacy compliance structure, something that becomes
very important and that will be expanded upon below. As is made
clear by the title, the compliance oﬃcer is essentially involved with

Understanding the Implementation of Technical Measures in the Process of Data Privacy Compliance: A Qualitative Study ESEM ’22, September 19–23, 2022, Helsinki, Finland

compliance-related matters within an organization. In the words of
one such oﬃcer, “A lot of what we do is obviously ensuring that
data privacy alone, amongst other compliance areas are [followed]
for the rest of business. . . privacy obviously being the larger one
of the pillars.” (I14-L). Compliance oﬃcers serve an integral role
in proper compliance, although it is not clear how widespread this
role is, i.e. in how many organizations such a role exists.

5.2.2 Technical side. Starting oﬀ with more of an umbrella term,
the concept of the Product Team encompasses the team involved
in the design and implementation of the product. In the techni-
cal sense, this usually refers to the system(s) being developed for
the market. Speciﬁcally on the product team may be roles such
as (software) developers and engineers, as well as the appropriate
leadership roles. The product team, lead by the project owner, is
connected with the necessary oﬃcers to perform a risk analysis of
the proposed project, which then serves as the basis for determin-
ing the necessary measures for compliance. The role of the project
owner is also emphasized as “the ﬁrst point of contact [regarding
privacy]... it’s the project owner’s responsibility to deal with com-
munication and bringing people together” (I6-T). Through this, one
can see a hierarchy being built with regards to privacy matters
within a technical vertical.

One speciﬁc role hailing from the technical vertical is that of
the architect. Using the more general term of Software Architect,
this person is more involved on the design side, rather than de-
velopment or implementation. For this reason, the architect’s role
becomes very important in the implementation of compliant sys-
tems, as it is in this stage of (pre-)development that sound privacy-
respecting practices are planned and incorporated. The role of Soft-
ware Architect is sometimes specialized to Privacy Architect, or
also Privacy and Security Architect, or even Enterprise Architect (more
generalized) in larger organizations. With this, the emphasis on the
design of privacy-preserving, secure systems is made concrete.

The role of Management, although not technical per se, is vital
in the privacy compliance structure. The concept of management
ﬁrst and foremost includes the “C-Suite” executives responsible for
the leadership and direction of organizations as a whole. It is often
the case that “decisions making [regarding compliance] come from
a couple levels above” (I1-T), i.e. management. A speciﬁc role that
came up in multiple interviews is the (Chief) Information Security
Oﬃcer. Interestingly enough, the title is misleading in the sense
that the responsibility for privacy matters also falls under this role
as well. Put in rather general terms, “The ISec oﬃcer is responsible
for ensuring there are no loopholes” (I6-T) in the development of
compliant systems.

5.2.3 The Go-Betweens. The next category, called the Go-Betweens
(or in-betweens), of the privacy compliance structure has been de-
ﬁned by the authors to indicate the inherent interdisciplinary re-
sponsibilities possessed by these roles, often transcending one sin-
gle ﬁeld or sector.

The role of the Data Protection Oﬃcer (DPO) has become cen-
tral to the privacy compliance process. The general work of a DPO
includes aiding in the compliance process for relevant data protec-
tion laws, accomplished via “monitoring speciﬁc processes, such as
data protection impact assessments or the awareness-raising and
training of employees for data protection, as well as collaborating

with the supervisory authorities”3. The appointment of a DPO is
not a blanket requirement, but rather depends on the data process-
ing activities of the organization. Companies are also allowed rela-
tive freedom with regards to selection of a DPO, having the ﬂexibil-
ity in the choice of an internal or external DPO. The DPOs are "de
facto go-betweens" (I3-L), and in the words of an acting DPO, "The
person taking care of data protection in an organization needs to
be hybrid." (I5-LT). At the core of the responsibilities of this person
lies the task of liaising between what is said in the law, i.e. the letter
of the law, and how this is implemented in practice. Ultimately, it
is crucial to note that, “At the end of the day, the data protection
oﬃcer is more a legal person than a technical person.” (I2-T).

Another more hybrid, in-between role is that of a Privacy Engi-
neer, who is also placed at the intersection of law and technology,
but is more on the technical side of the process. As deﬁned by one
of the interviewees, “Privacy engineering is really about ensuring
there is the trust at the level of technology to protect privacy and to
mitigate privacy risks.” (I9-T). A major responsibility of a privacy
engineer comes as a policy maker for an organization: “We’re the
ones who deﬁne, dictate, and do privacy assessments.” (I9-T). It is
interesting to note that “you more or less get very diﬀerent back-
grounds in privacy engineering” (I4-T). Privacy engineers do not
necessarily need to be experts in the ﬁner details of the technolo-
gies and implementations themselves; it is their expertise in data
protection, privacy design principles, and the implications of pri-
vacy to society at large that provide an unique supplement to the
design and implementation of technology, making the role so valu-
able, and at the same time challenging. As profoundly described by
I4-T: “Privacy engineering is fundamentally dealing with science
that has not yet been codiﬁed.”

5.2.4 External stakeholders. In the process of privacy compliance,
much of the work when it comes to tooling and automation is of-
ten outsourced to Third Party Vendors. These vendors often com-
prise of external companies providing a service or technology as
a “technical measure” for compliance. One interviewee conﬁrms
that “most of the external interactions we have is with third party
software providers for security functions and when it’s about tool-
ing.” (I2-T). This solution is useful for organizations looking for
an “out-of-the-box” system, yet the introduction of third parties
into a process centered on privacy can also raise concerns and/or
challenges.

Supervisory Authorities can serve as a useful resource for organi-
zations in guiding privacy compliance programs. It is interesting
to note that while several interviewees mentioned them only in
passing, a clear need for more interaction was often expressed.

The ﬁnal external actor, arguably the most important, is the Cus-
tomer. While this stakeholder was not often mentioned explicitly,
the implicit inclusion of this person was without a doubt always
tacitly understood. One must not forget that in the myriad of dis-
cussions surrounding privacy, compliance, technical measures and
regulations, the customer (user, individual) is the ultimate stake-
holder, whose data comprises the crux of the issue.

3https://gdpr-info.eu/issues/data-protection-oﬃcer/

ESEM ’22, September 19–23, 2022, Helsinki, Finland

Klymenko et al.

RQ2: The implementation of technical measures for data pri-
vacy compliance involves many roles and responsibilities,
most notably those of the so-called “Go-Betweens”.

5.3 Interactions (RQ 3)
There exists a series of crucial interactions that must take place for
technical measures to be realized. Proposing that structuring these
is a key ﬁrst step to understanding the technical measures them-
selves, we distinguish three particular interaction types. As such,
our main focus lies in the interactions where technical forces are at
play, i.e. where the technical measures are ultimately implemented.

5.3.1 Technical-Technical. Before the inﬂuence of legal support even
comes into play, much of the interaction regarding the technical
measures for privacy compliance occurs within the technical sphere.
It is in these technical-technical interactions that many of the tech-
nical roles described above operate in their daily capacities.

The ﬁrst set of such interactions occur “vertically” within the
engineering side of compliance. A privacy engineer may not be
“working directly with legal to do things, [but] still taking direc-
tion from [an] engineering manager” (I1-T). This is validated from
the statement of another privacy engineer: “Sometimes I’ll interact
with a program manager or a technical program manager, if there
is a need, like maybe they have broader insight into a project that
a given engineer doesn’t.” (I4-T). Privacy architects involved also
have a “factual reporting line to the product management” (I2-T).
In this way, one begins to see that much of the guidance and di-
rection for technical decisions regarding privacy is handed down
from direct managers within an engineering vertical. Speciﬁcally,
“the head of the tech vertical will always get down to the cut and
dry for us, which is directly asking Legal questions.” (I1-T).

Of more of the “horizontal” nature come interactions between
privacy engineers and other parties. One privacy engineer is “in
almost constant communication with either subject matter experts,
software engineers, or both, because sometimes they overlap” (I4-
T). The dialogue with these subject matter experts is important
for privacy engineers to stay up-to-date on relevant topics, both
technical and legal. Interactions with software engineers can be
viewed as more “diagonally down”, as privacy engineers provide
the necessary guidance and policy for privacy-protecting systems.
A ﬁnal important set of interactions within the technical sphere
is interactions with peers within the same group or team. An illus-
trative example of these came from the interview with I4-T, who
described a team of many privacy engineers, all of whom were
specialized in something slightly diﬀerent. Because of this, each
member’s strengths could be drawn upon for the mutual beneﬁt
of all privacy engineers. These horizontal relationships, therefore,
play a vital role as well.

5.3.2 Technical-Legal. As introduced in previous sections, the need
to implement technical measures to comply to privacy regulations
has brought together two inherently diﬀerent ﬁelds, and more ab-
stractly, two quite diﬀerent ways of thinking.

Starting from the non-management level of the engineering ver-
tical, the main technical-legal interactions occur with the appointed
DPO. In the words of an architect, “Sometimes we interact with the
data protection oﬃcer, when it’s about the speciﬁc interpretation

of legal requirements or validating a certain technology ﬁts to the
requirement or not.” (I2-T). This description is very insightful in
the way that it binds the interpretation of legal requirements to
the validation of a technology. Precisely this illuminates the go-
between role of the DPO. Another source of legal support for en-
gineers, going back to the horizontal interactions described above,
was described by I4-T: “Who do I go to with a legal question? Nor-
mally, I’ll ask senior experts, people who are privacy engineers,
who are former lawyers, it’s probably my ﬁrst pitstop.”

Viewing this category from more of the legal-technical direc-
tion, the interaction between legal support (besides the DPO) and
non-management technical parties seems to be of the rarest occur-
rences. I8-L mentions sometimes liaising with an organization’s
structured IT or development teams, claiming “I can’t imagine how
I would be able to actually do my work without kind of a real input
from the IT team.” (I8-L). I16-L also mentions such interactions.

A set of interactions that takes place undoubtedly more often is
the dialogue between legal teams and the technical leadership of
organizations. One illustration of the technical-legal relationship
from the legal perspective is as such: “We have a designated Infor-
mation Security Oﬃcer, who works with these issues from the IT
side. And usually I share my ﬁndings with him, and he shares his
ﬁndings with me. So we’re kind of communicating really, I would
say, really well.” (I8-L). A similar level of communication is con-
veyed from an external DPO, who initially sets up an “at least two
hour interview with the IT leader of the companies” (I12-L).

The ﬁnal type of technical-legal interactions comes in the form
of cross-teams, or cross-functional teams, a topic which came up in
some interviews. These teams typically consist of members from
diﬀerent departments, including those that are more technically
or legally oriented. While such a concept does not always exist, it
describes an interesting avenue for cross-disciplinary exchange.

5.3.3
Legal-Legal. A ﬁnal category of interactions described in
some interviews were those of a purely legal nature. Since these
are out of scope of this paper, they are only mentioned brieﬂy.

Outside counsel or even an external DPO may often work with
the legal compliance team within an organization, serving a more
advisory or guiding role. Similarly, an internal DPO may seek con-
sultation from an external consultant.

An interesting example comes out of the interview with I14-L,
with the idea of a “Data Governance Council”. While this is not a
purely legal team, it is placed under the legal-legal category. Specif-
ically, this council “is more of an independent board of senior lead-
ership... if anything ever needs to be ﬂagged from both business
and clients [on one side] and legal [on the other], it gets esca-
lated to them, and they can make more of the business related
approaches to risk” (I14-L). This is certainly an interesting sub-
structure, but something that is not widely adopted, as far as can
be determined from the interview ﬁndings.

5.3.4 On Better and/or More Interaction. Regarding the question
of whether better interaction between technical and legal roles is
needed, the responses represent a particularly crucial point of anal-
ysis, especially in the scope of RQ3. Many interviewees agree that

Understanding the Implementation of Technical Measures in the Process of Data Privacy Compliance: A Qualitative Study ESEM ’22, September 19–23, 2022, Helsinki, Finland

improved interaction (in frequency or quality) between the techni-
cal and legal sides of data privacy compliance would indeed be ben-
eﬁcial. Some interviewees, such as I8-L, note that day-to-day com-
munication may not be necessary, but “it does require processes
to have been built out”, once again supporting the importance of
the process behind technical measures. One of the most concrete
responses to the question originates from I14-L, who illustrates the
following dynamic:

“Yes, deﬁnitely. The one way I see it is tech is driv-
ing a lot of the new changes in privacy. And it’s not
enough for it to just be a legal focus team without
consulting with tech, I think it needs to be a mix of
the two, because the two kind of balance each other
out, because that’s what privacy is becoming.”

In this way, the interdisciplinary nature of technical measures, and
the process of their implementation, is highlighted as truly interdis-
ciplinary. A dissenting opinion, though, is expressed by I4-T, who
adamantly responds: “No, they’re not going to know how to do
what I do.” To a lesser degree, I5-LT also agrees with this sentiment,
but for the reason that positions such as the DPO exist precisely to
bridge the technical-legal gap. As such, it is incredibly interesting
that these two opposing views come from the Go-Between roles.

RQ3: For technical measures to be implemented, an intricate
web of interactions must take place, especially those of an
interdisciplinary nature.

6 DISCUSSION
6.1 Breaking Down Technical Measures
The ﬁndings presented in Section 5.1 clearly illustrate the multi-
faceted nature of the implementation of technical measures, par-
ticularly in its perception by diﬀerent roles involved in the privacy
compliance process. Breaking down these responses illuminates
some interesting insights, which ultimately points to a divergence
in technical and legal perspectives on the matter, as well as the
inherent complexity of the notion of technical measures.

Analyzing the discussion of technical measures in the interviews,
one can compartmentalize the practical understanding thereof in
a somewhat clear way. Firstly, technical measures thought from
the purely technical point of view cannot be ignored. In a perhaps
surprising way, this straightforward approach was preferred by
legal interviewees, pointing to speciﬁc technologies that are ref-
erenced in GDPR, for example. Another predominant viewpoint
comes with the understanding of technical measures as a risk as-
sessment. In other interviews, the idea of data ﬂow was seen as
paramount to understanding technical measures. In these ways,
the notion of technical measures is made concrete, at least in the
eyes of the privacy professional being interviewed.

A matter that is left less concrete is the role of Privacy-Enhancing
Technologies (PETs), something with which technical interviewees
provided valuable insight. Although one would be hard pressed
to refute the privacy-preserving capabilities of such technologies,
their practical prevalence as technical measures remains in ques-
tion due to factors such as complexity, education, and legal inter-
pretability.

The ﬂip side must also be analyzed. In an equally surprising
manner, technical interviewees tended not to focus on speciﬁc tech-
nologies that may suﬃce as technical measures. Rather, they were
more inclined to discuss broader issues surrounding technical mea-
sures, the understanding thereof, and the overall compliance pro-
cess. The vagueness of technical measures and the interpretation
required because of it was an important talking point, one that
was also promoted by legal voices. The discrepancy between legal
mandate and technical implementation was likewise emphasized.
Unexpectedly, interviewees did not generally show awareness
about tools supporting the implementation of technical measures
for data privacy compliance. One of the reasons for low awareness
and lacking adoption of such tools in practice can be attributed to
insuﬃcient attention to both technical and legal perspectives.

Uniting the two camps is the general characteristic shared by
most responses that the process of implementing technical mea-
sures is not a codiﬁed science. There is much room for interpreta-
tion, and concurrently, there exist many factors beyond the tech-
nology itself. Ultimately, one can hypothesize that such factors
lead precisely to the diﬀerences in viewpoints over technical mea-
sures reﬂected in the interviews. Such a ﬁnding conﬁrms the unique
nature of technical measures, as well as demands deeper inquiry
into its understanding.

6.2 Lack of Structural Uniformity
A cursory analysis of the ﬁndings presented in 5.2 reveals that
there is a multitude of roles involved in the privacy compliance
process. By studying such roles (and their responsibilities), one can
begin to understand the technical measures in question beyond the
measures themselves, by viewing how the ecosystem behind them
exists and functions.

The role of legal can be characterized by its advisory and sup-
porting nature. This can be extracted from the diction of legal inter-
views with frequent language revolving around supporting, ensur-
ing, and interpreting. An interesting junction in the legal side of pri-
vacy compliance comes with the overlapping roles of in-house and
external counsel, legal consultants, and compliance teams. While
the utilization of such roles vary by organization size and data pro-
cessing activity, it is seemingly the case that the responsibilities
amongst these roles can be easily conﬂated. This may call for a
better understanding of and distinction between the legal roles in-
volved in the implementation of technical measures.

The technical inﬂuence in the interpretation and implementa-
tion of technical measures must also be stressed. Indeed, one can
observe that much of the work surrounding technical measures,
including the interpretation of regulation, may exist solely in the
engineering vertical. This emphasizes foremost the crucial part
played by management roles within the engineering vertical, who
ultimately are responsible for overseeing the implementation of
technical measures.

This still does not fully exclude a necessity for the involvement
of legal experts. In some organizations, engineers themselves have
a direct or indirect line (e.g. through management) of communica-
tion to escalate issues or questions directly to legal teams.

Serving as the necessary bridge between the technical and legal
sphere of privacy compliance, the term of "Go-Between" has been

ESEM ’22, September 19–23, 2022, Helsinki, Finland

Klymenko et al.

coined. These roles are incredibly interesting to analyze in the way
that inherent to the job is the connection of two distinctly diﬀer-
ent ﬁelds of thought. In this way, two important connectors have
surfaced, one that clearly “leans” more technically, and one more
legally. The role of Privacy Engineering as the driving factor for
an organization’s policy on privacy regarding technical measures
becomes very important. Analogously, the Data Protection Oﬃcer
must balance legal know-how with a cursory understanding of the
systems in play. Above all, the interaction of these Go-Betweens,
both among themselves and with their counterparts, is presumably
of utmost importance, yet these interactions remain not well stud-
ied. This becomes the building block for the ensuing discussion.

As such, the number of roles that in some way tangent upon
the implementation of technical measures is quite sizeable. One
possible analysis of this fact may realize the opportunity for great
collaboration amongst this variety of roles. A more skeptical ob-
server may posit that such a disparity in the roles involved may
reﬂect that there exists no structured and widely adopted model
from an organizational perspective for approaching privacy com-
pliance. In fact, we can assume that while both technical and legal
perspectives have their own approaches to the implementation of
technical measures, there is a lack of exchange and integration be-
tween them. We also see that the introduction of "Go-Betweens"
is an eﬀort to compensate such disparity through the introduction
of a role that is interdisciplinary by nature.

6.3 Interdisciplinarity
The ﬁndings of RQ3 highlight the prevalence of interactions be-
tween roles of diﬀering expertise. This is made clear in the technical-
legal category, but is also true for the interactions occurring within
the technical vertical. In this way, the interdisciplinarity of privacy
compliance, centered around technical measures, becomes evident.
It is for this reason that the interactions surrounding the im-
plementation of technical measures become interesting points of
investigation. With such dynamism and interconnection, there is
bound to be fruitful collaboration, but also undoubtedly ineﬃcien-
cies and challenges. Conducting a deeper dive into these intersec-
tions would merit worthwhile future work, in order to understand
better the complexities of such dynamic interaction.

Our ﬁndings indicate a clear agreement for better and/or more
interaction between the various roles introduced here, particularly
between the technical and legal ones. It is in these interdisciplinary
relationships that a clearer, more uniﬁed understanding of techni-
cal measures can be achieved, so as to harmonize the inherently
diﬀerent perspectives of the two. While the manifestation of such
interdisciplinarity may not be so straightforward in practice, it be-
comes an excellent standard for which to strive.

7 THREATS TO VALIDITY
External validity: Since this is exploratory research investigat-
ing practitioners, we placed a high emphasis on external validity
according to Cook and Campbell [4, 6]. To achieve this, we fol-
lowed two strategies: First, we targeted expert participants with
signiﬁcant experience as privacy professionals in the industrial
context. This ensured that reported issues have practical relevance
and were not due to the lack of experience. Second, we ensured

heterogeneity among participants by recruiting them from diﬀer-
ent industries and domains. As for the transferability of the ob-
servations, we acknowledge the size of our sample remains small,
and we cannot generalize the ﬁndings to all the organizations. Nev-
ertheless, we reduced this threat by interviewing practitioners in
diﬀerent roles from diﬀerent domains and diﬀerently sized compa-
nies. Moreover, we observed a convergence of the ﬁndings during
the interviews and analysis. We assume in another similar context,
the observations will be similar. Nonetheless, our study results re-
quire further conﬁrmation by subsequent investigations.

Construct Validity: Since our study is exploratory, construct
validity was not the primary concern. Nevertheless, we minimized
threats to it by (i) piloting and reviewing the interview guideline
among researchers, (ii) performing each interview via video call,
allowing for immediate clariﬁcation of questions, and (iii) conduct-
ing some interviews with at least two researchers, one guiding the
conversation, one taking notes and asking for clariﬁcation.

Reliability: Reliability of outcomes was important for our in-
vestigation. We achieved it by adhering to the GT (Grounded The-
ory) approach. We rigorously protocolled each step and followed
structured coding procedures to develop a theory based on the raw
data obtained in the interviews.

8 CONCLUSION
In this work, we investigated the current understanding of the
term "technical measures" among privacy professionals and the
processes that take place to implement these measures in prac-
tice, focusing on the roles and interactions of the involved parties
in both technical and legal sectors. Our results demonstrate that
there is no clear mutual understanding and commonly accepted
approach to handling the process of implementation of technical
measures.

From a practical perspective, our results demonstrate the impor-
tance of the interaction between legal and engineering functions
for the implementation of technical measures. Still, such interac-
tions remain rare and transpire in various forms. Hence, further
enhancement of such interactions is a clear practical step towards
improving the implementation of technical measures for compli-
ance. From a scientiﬁc perspective, our results support previous
suggestions about the need for closer interactions between soft-
ware engineering and legal roles in regulatory compliance. Our
results suggest that it is important to consider data privacy com-
pliance practices in the industry to assure the practical relevance
of research results.

In our opinion, future work in this direction should be focused
on a closer empirical research of technical-legal interaction required
for the implementation of technical measures, investigation of bar-
riers to the development and practical adoption of tools and tech-
nologies that support the implementation of technical measures,
as well as on the education and awareness of practitioners about
the existing tools and technologies such as PETs. As mentioned in
Section 6, the understanding of PETs as technical measures and
how they can be rectiﬁed with regulatory requirements must be
further investigated. Moreover, although the study subjects were
senior practitioners, the sample size was relatively small and thus,
generalizations can be diﬃcult. Thus, future work should aim to

Understanding the Implementation of Technical Measures in the Process of Data Privacy Compliance: A Qualitative Study ESEM ’22, September 19–23, 2022, Helsinki, Finland

collect further evidence to reﬁne and support the observations de-
scribed in this paper.

Another pertinent avenue for future work should focus on the
people, roles, and responsibilities involved in the process of pri-
vacy compliance. Speciﬁcally, how issues such as privacy educa-
tion and awareness can aﬀect the implementation of technical mea-
sures within organizations may prove to be a highly interesting
point of investigation. A pressing question then becomes: how can
technical measures be understood comprehensively when the struc-
tures behind them are so disparate? This forms the basis of future
inquiry.

The common ground for these future avenues is founded in the
interdisciplinary relationships that became a predominant theme
in the ﬁndings, and subsequently, this paper. It is these interactions,
we argue, where the process of implementation of technical mea-
sures (and the understanding thereof) comes to a crucial junction
point.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work has been supported by the German Federal Ministry
of Education and Research (BMBF) Software Campus grant LACE
01IS17049 and the Bavarian Research Institute for Digital Trans-
formation (bidt) funding for projects "Diﬀerential Privacy: A New
Approach to Handling Social Big Data" and "Coding Public Value".

REFERENCES
[1] Abdulrahman Alhazmi and Nalin Asanka Gamagedara Arachchilage. 2021. I’m
all ears! Listening to software developers on putting GDPR principles into soft-
ware development practice. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 25, 5 (2021),
879–892.

[2] Micah Altman, Aloni Cohen, Kobbi Nissim, and Alexandra Wood. 2020.
What a Hybrid Legal-Technical Analysis Teaches Us About Privacy Reg-
ulation: The Case of Singling Out.
(2020).
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3681729

SSRN Electronic Journal

[3] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2012. Thematic analysis. (2012).
[4] Donald T Campbell and Julian C Stanley. 2015.
experimental designs for research. Ravenio Books.

Experimental and quasi-

[5] Tek Raj Chhetri, Anelia Kurteva, Rance J. DeLong, Rainer Hilscher, Kai Korte,
and Anna Fensel. 2022. Data Protection by Design Tool for Automated GDPR
Compliance Veriﬁcation Based on Semantically Modeled Informed Consent. Sen-
sors 22, 7 (April 2022), 2763. https://doi.org/10.3390/s22072763

[6] Thomas D Cook and Donald Thomas Campbell. 1979. Quasi-experimentation:

Design and analysis for ﬁeld settings. Rand McNally.

[7] Paul de Hert and Michal Czerniawski. 2016. Expanding the European data pro-
tection scope beyond territory: Article 3 of the General Data Protection Regula-
tion in its wider context. International Data Privacy Law 6, 3 (July 2016), 230–243.
https://doi.org/10.1093/idpl/ipw008

[8] Michelle Goddard. 2017. The EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR):
European Regulation that has a Global Impact. International Journal of Market
Research 59, 6 (Nov. 2017), 703–705. https://doi.org/10.2501/ijmr-2017-050
[9] Graham Greenleaf. 2019. Global data privacy laws 2019: 132 national laws &

many bills. (2019).

[10] Seda Gürses and Jose M Del Alamo. 2016. Privacy engineering: Shaping an
IEEE Security & Privacy 14, 2 (2016),

emerging ﬁeld of research and practice.
40–46.
[11] HHS.

2010.
Rule

the
Secu-
technologies?
rity
https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/faq/2011/do-the-standards-of-the-security-rule-require-use-of-speciﬁc-technologies/index.html
Last Modiﬁed: 2021-06-28T08:59:34-0400.

standards

speciﬁc

require

use

the

Do

of

of

[12] Rashina Hoda, James Noble, and Stuart Marshall. 2011. Grounded Theory for
Geeks. In Proceedings of the 18th Conference on Pattern Languages of Programs
(Portland, Oregon, USA) (PLoP ’11). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, Article 24, 17 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/2578903.2579162

[13] Dominik Huth and Florian Matthes. 2019. "Appropriate Technical and Organi-
zational Measures": Identifying Privacy Engineering Approaches to Meet GDPR
Requirements. In AMCIS.
[14] Bert-Jaap Koops. 2006.

Should ICT Regulation Be Technology-Neutral?
In Starting Points for ICT Regulation, Aernout H.J. Schmidt and Philip E.
van Tongeren (Eds.). Vol. 9. T.M.C. Asser Press, The Hague, 77–108.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-90-6704-665-7_4 Series Title: Information Technol-
ogy and Law Series.

[15] Oleksandr Kosenkov, Michael Unterkalmsteiner, Daniel Mendez, and Davide
Fucci. 2021. Vision for an Artefact-based Approach to Regulatory Requirements
Engineering. In Proceedings of the 15th ACM/IEEE International Symposium on
Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement (ESEM). 1–6.

[16] Aaron K Massey, Richard L Rutledge, Annie I Antón, Justin D Hemmings, and Pe-
ter P Swire. 2015. A strategy for addressing ambiguity in regulatory requirements.
Technical Report. Georgia Institute of Technology.

[17] Jeremy C. Maxwell, Annie I. Antòn, and Julie B. Earp. 2013. An empirical in-
vestigation of software engineers’ ability to classify legal cross-references. In
2013 21st IEEE International Requirements Engineering Conference (RE). 24–31.
https://doi.org/10.1109/RE.2013.6636702

[18] Luca Piras, Mohammed Ghazi Al-Obeidallah, Andrea Praitano, Aggeliki Tsohou,
Haralambos Mouratidis, Beatriz Gallego-Nicasio Crespo, Jean Baptiste Bernard,
Marco Fiorani, Emmanouil Magkos, Andres Castillo Sanz, et al. 2019. DEFeND
architecture: a privacy by design platform for GDPR compliance. In International
Conference on Trust and Privacy in Digital Business. Springer, 78–93.

[19] Jed Rubenfeld. 1989. The right of privacy. Harvard Law Review (1989), 737–807.
[20] A. Selzer. 2021. Practitioners’ Corner The Appropriateness of Technical and
Organisational Measures under Article 32 GDPR. European Data Protection Law
Review 7, 1 (2021), 120–128. https://doi.org/10.21552/edpl/2021/1/16

ESEM ’22, September 19–23, 2022, Helsinki, Finland

Klymenko et al.

[21] Sean Sirur, Jason RC Nurse, and Helena Webb. 2018. Are we there yet? Under-
standing the challenges faced in complying with the General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR). In Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on Multi-
media Privacy and Security. 88–95.

[24] Muhammad Usman, Michael Felderer, Michael Unterkalmsteiner, Eriks Klotins,
Daniel Mendez, and Emil Alégroth. 2020. Compliance requirements in large-
scale software development: An industrial case study. In International Conference
on Product-Focused Software Process Improvement. Springer, 385–401.

[22] Mark
Three
https://news.bloomberglaw.com/bloomberg-law-analysis/analysis-three-years-later-gdpr-compliance-still-a-challenge

[25] Josephine Wolﬀ and Nicole Atallah. 2021. Early GDPR Penalties: Analysis of
Implementation and Fines Through May 2020. Journal of Information Policy 11,
1 (Jan. 2021), 63–103. https://doi.org/10.5325/jinfopoli.11.2021.0063

Palmer.
Compliance

ANALYSIS:
Challenge.

Jacquelyn
GDPR

and
Later,

Smith
Years

2021.

Still

a

[23] S. Spiekermann and L.F. Cranor. 2009. Engineering Privacy. IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering 35, 1 (Jan. 2009), 67–82. https://doi.org/10.1109/tse.2008.88

[26] Christian Zimmermann. 2020. Automation Potentials in Privacy Engineering.

Open Identity Summit 2020 (2020).

