2
2
0
2

g
u
A
9

]
E
S
.
s
c
[

2
v
4
9
6
1
0
.
8
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Sustaining Open Data as a Digital Common – Design principles for Common
Pool Resources applied to Open Data Ecosystems

JOHAN LINÅKER, RISE Research Institutes of Sweden, Sweden
PER RUNESON, Lund University, Sweden

Motivation. Digital commons is an emerging phenomenon and of increasing importance, as we enter a digital society. Open data is one
example that makes up a pivotal input and foundation for many of today’s digital services and applications. Ensuring sustainable
provisioning and maintenance of the data, therefore, becomes even more important. Aim. We aim to investigate how such provisioning
and maintenance can be collaboratively performed in the community surrounding a common. Specifically, we look at Open Data
Ecosystems (ODEs), a type of community of actors, openly sharing and evolving data on a technological platform. Method. We use
Elinor Ostrom’s design principles for Common Pool Resources as a lens to systematically analyze the governance of earlier reported
cases of ODEs using a theory-oriented software engineering framework. Results. We find that, while natural commons must regulate
consumption, digital commons such as open data maintained by an ODE must stimulate both use and data provisioning. Governance

needs to enable such stimulus while also ensuring that the collective action can still be coordinated and managed within the frame of

available maintenance resources of a community. Subtractability is, in this sense, a concern regarding the resources required to maintain

the quality and value of the data, rather than the availability of data. Further, we derive empirically-based recommended practices for

ODEs based on the design principles by Ostrom for how to design a governance structure in a way that enables a sustainable and
collaborative provisioning and maintenance of the data. Conclusion. ODEs are expected to play a role in data provisioning which
democratize the digital society and enables innovation from smaller commercial actors. Our empirically based guidelines intend to

support this development.

CCS Concepts: • Software and its engineering → Open source model.

Additional Key Words and Phrases: Open Data, Data Ecosystems, Digital Commons, Ostrom, Sustainability, Common Pool Resources

ACM Reference Format:
Johan Linåker and Per Runeson. 2022. Sustaining Open Data as a Digital Common – Design principles for Common Pool Resources
applied to Open Data Ecosystems. In Proceedings of (xxx’22). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 17 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/1122445.
1122456

1 INTRODUCTION

With the emergence of a digital society, the concept of commons has been applied to digital phenomena with applications

ranging, from Open Source Software (OSS) [4, 39] to open data [6, 36] and online projects such as Wikipedia [13, 42]. A

main reason for this relates to the parallel between the sustainability of digital commons [14], and the phenomenon

referred to as “the tragedy of the commons”, where individuals act in self-interest and over-utilize the common resource.

The “tragedy” is commonly exemplified through an open pasture where the rational herder out of self-interest aims to

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.

© 2022 Association for Computing Machinery.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
xxx’22,
,

Johan Linåker and Per Runeson

maximize his (momentary) benefit from the pasture by adding more animals, which in the end leads to over-grazing

and thereby reducing the benefit that can be gained from the pasture by any other herder [17].

The open pasture can in this sense be considered a Common Pool Resource (CPR), implying a resource system where

it is difficult (or costly) to exclude other actors from benefiting from the use of its resource units (i.e., grass in the

herding example) [32]. A second trait, also in the open pasture example, is that a CPR is subtractable in the sense that

over-utilization by some actors may reduce the benefit to be obtained from others if the system is not maintained.

To manage the tragedy, and the will to “free-ride” on the cost of others, researchers have argued for central regulation

or privatization of the CPR being the only options forward. However, as explained by Ostrom [32], CPRs can very

well be sustained (at least in small and local communities). From her work, design principles, that characterize robust

institutions for managing CPRs, have emerged [32]. These have later been validated and extended by Cox et al. [5],

empirically confirming them being well supported.

Preliminary proposals of how to map Ostrom’s principles to digital commons have been proposed [6, 13, 35, 36].

However, when mapping theory from general commons to digital commons, it is worth noting a fundamental difference.

Digital commons, such as software and data, can be consumed by multiple consumers at the same time without reducing

the benefits extracted by each consumer as the marginal production cost is close to zero (copying data or software [4]),

implying that digital commons are non-rival [6, 34]. As a consequence, considering the ecosystem in which the digital

common is shared and maintained, the value increases – rather than the opposite – since having more members raises

the probability that the ecosystem stays alive and the common resource is maintained [20].

The limitations are rather in labor and computing resources to maintain the commons [7], and as in Hardin’s tragedy

and following streams of literature, free-riding is a large issue. Limited or no maintenance of the digital common may

result in vulnerabilities being introduced, dependencies breaking, machine learning training-sets becoming invalid, or

business value being lost leading to users abandoning the common to further deteriorate as a consequence [7].

In this paper, we investigate how the value of a digital common [29] in the instance of open data [6, 36] (i.e., not
open hardware or software), can be sustained by its users and producers organized in a surrounding ecosystem [4, 14].
Specifically, we explore how Ostrom’s design principles may be applied in the context of ODEs to design a governance

structure that sustains the development, sharing, and quality of the open data, along with its boundary resources, while

still enabling open use and appropriation similar as to Wikipedia [13, 42] and OSS commons in general [14, 35, 39].

For each of the design principles, we analyze previously reported cases of open data [37, 42] and open software

ecosystems [13, 35], and observe how their governance has been set up to enable joint maintenance of the data as well

as its boundary resources. The analysis is then validated against the earlier reported practice proposals of how to map

Ostrom’s principles to digital commons [6, 36].

We find, in the case of ODEs, that the governance is designed to promote participation and encourage contributions,
rather than monitor and sanction usage of a common, as the case with the original design principles. Specifically, we

propose for each principle, a recommendation for orchestrators or members of ODEs in how they may design their

governance in such a way that it promotes the sustainability of open data and the potential value it can provide in

existing and future ecosystems.

2

Sustaining Open Data as a Digital Common – Design principles for Common Pool Resources applied to Open Data Ecosystems

xxx’22,
,

2 BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK

2.1 Open Data Ecosystems

The ecosystem lens, stemming from the biological setting, has been used both on business [20] and technical levels [22]

to describe how actors collaborate in a common context towards a common goal while benefiting from the joint efforts

more than what they would in isolation. Software ecosystems, including OSS, is a well-explored area where actors

collaborate on the development and maintenance of a common software platform, that actors in turn can reuse and

extend in a common market or type of use case [1]. Recently, the lens had been adopted to data ecosystems as well [38].
Following work by Runeson et al. [26, 37], we define an Open Data Ecosystem as a networked community of
actors (organizations and individuals), which base their relations to each other on a common interest. This interest
is underpinned by a technological platform that enables actors to process data (e.g., find, archive, publish, consume,
or reuse) as well as to foster innovation, create value, or support new businesses. Actors collaborate on the data and
boundary resources (e.g., software and standards), through the exchange of information, resources, and artifacts.

The technological platform, that enables and facilitates the collaboration, is maintained and facilitated by a platform

provider, who usually is the main actor that initiated the ecosystem and orchestrates the overarching collaboration [26].

This actor is commonly constituted by a public sector organization, as sharing of data from and between private actors

is still an emerging phenomenon [38]. In cases where the data being shared openly is either produced or collected by a
public sector organization, the data is commonly referred to as open government data (OGD) [26].

The ecosystem actors may be categorized based on their importance for the ecosystem at large and the influence,

formal or informal, that usually follows regarding the platform and collaboration. This can be visualized using Nakakoji

et al.’s onion model, where those actors in the layers closest to the center have a higher level of influence compared

to those further out who are usually more passive or inactive [30]. The center is made up of the platform provider or

group of actors (commonly referred to as keystones) who are leading the decision-making.

On a functional level, actors in an ecosystem can take on one or multiple roles, e.g., data providers, data brokers,

infrastructure and tool providers, service providers, application developers, and application users [21, 24]. They interact

in what can be referred to as value networks, where data is shared, enriched, and used as input to new and improved

products, services, or use cases that create value for the actors [21, 27]. However, incentives may not necessarily be tied

to the data, but rather the knowledge and boundary resources shared as a consequence of the collaboration [37].

2.2 The emergence of digital commons

Commons is a broad term, seldom explicitly defined [18, 23]. According to Hess and Ostrom, commons conveys a
“notion of shared ownership, participation, and responsibility” [19]. Hess later proposes the definition of a common as a
“resource shared by a group where the resource is vulnerable to enclosure, overuse, and social dilemmas. Unlike a public
good, it requires management and protection in order to sustain it.” Underpinning the definition, is a mapping of what
types of commons that has emerged, where Hess distinguishes between the traditional commons (such as fisheries,
forests, and grazing lands), and other types as that of knowledge commons and its subset of online mass collaboration
projects (including Wikipedia, and OSS in general) [18].

The traditional type of commons aligns well with what Ostrom considers as CPRs, i.e., a resource system that is large

enough to be non-exclusive, yet subtractable in terms of resource units within the system [32]. Knowledge commons on

the other hand, and online mass collaboration projects specifically, expand the understanding of what a common may
imply. Benkler characterizes this expansion with the distinction between bounded and open commons [4]. The bounded
3

xxx’22,
,

Johan Linåker and Per Runeson

common resource is appropriated exclusively and governed within a community as with traditional commons. The
open common resource has no boundaries in terms of appropriation and is open access (in full or part) to the public as
with knowledge commons. Schweik and English make an aligning distinction between environmental and OSS-based

commons, where the focus of the community in the latter is on co-creating a public good for anyone to use rather

than overuse as in the former [39], aligning with e.g., Jullien and Roudaut [23]. Viégas et al. [42] distinguishes between

on-line and off-line communities characterized by the works of Benkler [4] and Ostrom [32] respectively.

Benkler describes the open and OSS-based commons as a product of commons-based peer-production [3], i.e., as

the case when a publicly available common is used as input to a collaborative and coordinated production process

between a number of individuals, and the output from the process is released back to the originating common [2]. Fuster
Morell describes the communities, in which this peer-production takes place, as Online Creation Communities where
individuals collaborate through an online platform in creating and sharing a CPR [14]. These communities, exemplified

through Wikipedia and OSS, are open to anyone wishing to use or contribute to the common development of the CPR.
These characteristics are highlighted by Fuster Morell [29] in her definition of digital commons as “information and
knowledge resources that are collectively created and owned or shared between or among a community and that tend to be

non-exclusive, that is, be (generally freely) available to third parties. Thus, they are oriented to favor use and reuse, rather

than to exchange as a commodity. Additionally, the community of people building them can intervene in the governing of

their interaction processes and of their shared resources.”

2.3 Governance of digital commons related to software and data

Governance, as with commons, also comes with multiple definitions. Markus defines it in the context of OSS as “the
means of achieving the direction, control, and coordination of wholly or partially autonomous individuals and organizations
on behalf of an OSS development project to which they jointly contribute” [28]. De Laat in turn considers governance as
configurations primarily based on democratic or autocratic principles [8]. Configurations that can be nuanced even

further [9, 16], evolve with time [31], and even co-exist [40]. In a similar context, Alves et al. [1] define governance
mechanisms as “managerial tools of participants in software ecosystems, i.e., orchestrators and platform extenders that
have the goal of influencing an ecosystem’s health. Ecosystems are healthy when they exhibit longevity and propensity for
growth.” A definition further contextualized in the case of data ecosystems by Oliviera et al. [38].

The connection between governance and health aligns with the intention of Ostrom regarding her design principles

of a governance structure that enables a sustainable CPR, i.e., a scenario where its resources are neither depleted nor

degraded [32]. The applicability of the design principles in terms of digital commons such as open data and OSS has,

however, only been explored to a limited extent (with notable exceptions [6, 13, 35, 36, 42]). One reason for this may be

that the CPR framework aligns more with the traditional commons, rather than knowledge and digital commons [18].

However, as hinted by Benkler [4], work on CPR may still provide input to the governance within the community

where the commons-based peer-production takes place.

This is illustrated by Viégas et al. [42] and Forte et al. [13] who apply Ostrom’s design principles to the governance
of Wikipedia. Forte et al. state that the principles fit as the “[Wikipedia] community is not only managing a resource, it is
striving to encourage collaboration and cooperation among volunteers” [13]. They found that the governance is upheld
and facilitated through social norms developed by the community through time [13], aligning with Ostrom’s suggestion

that norms have a higher impact and long-term acceptance than external rules imposed on a community [33].

Rozas [35] performed a similar study on self-organization carried out in the Drupal OSS community. Rozas used

the design principles by Ostrom to describe and capture related organizational changes in the Drupal OSS community

4

Sustaining Open Data as a Digital Common – Design principles for Common Pool Resources applied to Open Data Ecosystems

xxx’22,
,

Fig. 1. Overview of research method, based on Stol and Fitzgerald [41]. Grey boxes refer to Runeson and Linåker’s study [37] and
white boxes to the current one.

as it has grown and adopted a decentralized governance and decision-making process. The connection between OSS

commons and CPRs is further explored by O’Mahony who confirms that the two share certain characteristics in terms

of regulating the balance between provisioning and appropriation [34], where licences are central in the digital domain.

O’Mahony specifically investigates how copyleft license obligations are enforced to make (especially) commercial

appropriators contribute back modifications or additions to the OSS (i.e., the common) to preserve its quality.

In terms of open data, Coyle et al. make the analogy of how an upstream farmer may need to share water with a
downstream community to improve harvest so that everyone can benefit from [6]. According to Coyle et al., “the holder
of data may need to sacrifice some private economic benefits by sharing data to unlock potentially much larger benefits for
their sector or supply chain.” In their report, Coyle et al. further highlight how Ostrom’s design principles for CPRs can
guide the regulation and governance of the data, by contextualizing the principles from a data economy perspective.

Ruhaak et al. make a similar translation of Ostrom’s design principle to the context of data commons [36].

3 RESEARCH APPROACH

3.1 Methodology

The research is a deepened and refocused analysis of existing literature and empirical studies of ODEs [13, 35, 37],

using Ostrom’s design principles as an analytical lens [32]. For each of the design principles, we contrast previously

reported cases of digital commons and how the governance has been set up to enable joint maintenance of the data,

as well as its boundary resources. The analysis is then contrasted with the earlier reported proposals of how to map
Ostrom’s principles to open data as a digital common. We specifically address the questions of (RQ1) how Ostrom’s
design principles may be applied in the context of ODEs to help sustain the shared data, and (RQ2) what the fundamental
differences are between natural and digital commons.

Conceptually, we follow Stol and Fitzgerald’s theory-oriented software engineering process [41], as outlined in Fig. 1.

In Runeson et al’s previous work, focus group interviews were conducted, and observations were made in three ODE

practice cases (ESS–CSDL, RoDL, and JobTech), which were conceptualized into a general conceptual model of ODE [37].
The model consists of four higher-level themes: value, intrinsics, governance, and evolution. Of these, governance is of
particular interest for this study.

5

Theoretical levelEmpirical levelODE literatureFocus group interviewsCase observationsESS-CSDL, RoDL, JobTechEmpirical generalizationDetermination of guidelinesConceptual ODE modelCommons literatureWikipedia, DrupalConceptualizationGeneralizationDeriviationPractice guidelinesMozilla, BennettRe-analysisRuneson and Linåker studyThis studyLensValidationxxx’22,
,

Johan Linåker and Per Runeson

Using Ostrom’s eight design principles for commons as a lens, we revisit the analysis and the underpinning empirical

data of the conceptual ODE model and its governance theme specifically. For each of the eight principles, we firstly

contextualize other researchers’ interpretations and application of the principles, both in terms of a) case studies of

Wikipedia [13, 42] and Drupal [35], and b) two sets of existing practice guidelines, related to Ostrom’s guidelines and

open data as a digital common; one set by Coyle et al. [6] and one published by the Mozilla foundation [36]. However,

as the derivation of these guidelines is not transparently reported, we consider them to be directly practice-based rather

than theoretically founded (labeled as a “shortcut” by Stol and Fitzgerald [41]). Secondly, each principle is contextualized

in terms of ODE governance, followed by an analysis and comparison between the ODE contextualization and that of

the related work. Thirdly, we derive recommendations for how governance of ODEs can be performed in a way that

promotes and enables sustainable maintenance of the digital commons overseen by an ODE.

3.2 Cases

In our analysis, we consider three cases from our previously reported work [37] where further details are available.

Case 1 concerns the The Road Data Lab (RoDL), a joint industry–academia project focused on sharing and collaborating
on image and sensor data related to roads. The goal is to provide a basis for machine-learning-based applications related

to autonomous driving, but also to explore challenges related to the sharing of data and how these can be addressed.
Case 2 regards the ESS Control System Data Lab (ESS–CSDL), part of The European Spallation Source (ESS) consortium,
which is responsible for managing data from the control systems of the consortium’s multi-disciplinary research facility.

The ecosystem’s scope is to share and collaborate on alarm data, stemming from the control systems and provide a basis

for joint innovation and knowledge sharing on how the data can be leveraged to improve the security and operations of

the research facility (and related contexts).

Case 3 focus on JobTech Development (JobTech), an ODE initiated and orchestrated by the Swedish Public Employment
Service focused on sharing and collaborating on data that can help improve the digital match-making between job

seekers and employers in Sweden. Data includes job ads, personal resumés, and a taxonomy of skills and work titles.

4 RESULTS AND ANALYSIS

4.1 Principle 1: Clearly defined boundaries

“Individuals or households who have rights to withdraw resource units from the CPR must be clearly defined, as must the
boundaries of the CPR itself” [32].

4.1.1 Related interpretations on Digital commons: Forte et al. note that the principle, in terms of traditional commons,
is focused on defining who has the right to withdraw resource units from a common that is consumable [13]. In terms

of Wikipedia, which output can be classified as open-access, the principle is re-interpreted to define who is included

and has the right to contribute to the commons-based peer-production. This is considered especially important since

anyone is eligible to participate without being familiar with the processes of the peer-production.

This interpretation was further adopted by Rozas in the case of the Drupal OSS community, who noted an increased

formalization and definition of these boundaries as the community grew [35]. The interpretations of Rozas and Forte
et al., hence, mainly focus on who can contribute to the common, and as a consequence with whom to communicate
norms and processes related to the peer-production. In essence, this aligns rather well with the intention of Ostrom
who considers the principle as a means to help members of a community know “who is in and who is out of a defined set
of relationships and thus with whom to cooperate” [33].

6

Sustaining Open Data as a Digital Common – Design principles for Common Pool Resources applied to Open Data Ecosystems

xxx’22,
,

From a data economy perspective, provided by Coyle et al., the principle also covers the appropriation aspects as
highlighted in the original definition: “Clarity on the rights of different entities to control, access, use and share data” [6].
Ruhaak et al. align in their interpretation concerning data commons as the boundaries should help to “determine who
can contribute, access, and use the data resource or make decisions about it. [The boundaries] also [help] determine the
shape and context of the data resource itself” [36]

4.1.2 Contextualization on ODEs: Actors within an ODE base their interrelations on a common interest with the
rationale that working together and sharing resources creates more value than standing alone. The common interest,

which implicitly leads to defining the boundaries, is the basis for a common vision and purpose for the ODE, and thereby

what type of resources should be shared and collaborated on, i.e., the type of data and related boundary resources. The

boundaries and vision for the ecosystem is commonly defined by the platform provider and keystone actors closest to

the core of the ecosystem (see Section 2.1).

Among the cases studied, we could differentiate between three types of driving forces among these core groups of
actors that help to shape the common vision and way forward. One type concerns the business-driven ODEs where there
is an emphasis on creating commercial value and opportunities for companies involved in the ecosystem (exemplified
by ESS–CSDL and RoDL). Public-driven ODEs (as in the case of JobTech) are a second type where the main focus is on
creating value for the society at large. In the third type, the community-driven ODEs, the driving force is not necessarily
limited to a public or business-centered incentive, but may also include personal or group-wise incentives for individuals

and organizations, either co-located or decentralized. Although not studied as a case, OpenStreetMap may be considered

as an example. Among the three types mentioned, however, it should be noted that they are not mutually exclusive. An

ODE may very well have commercial goals while the overall purpose can be classified as public-driven.

4.1.3 Analysis and recommendation: As in all related cases, the output of the commons-based peer production in the
ODEs is available as open access. Yet, there is still value in defining who will benefit from and use the data as this can be

considered part of the ecosystem’s common goal and vision. While the cases of Wikipedia [13] and Drupal [35] mainly

consider boundaries in terms of contributing and engaging in the peer-production, Coyle et al. [6] and Ruhaak et al. [36]

also consider the use and appropriation perspective of the data as important to define as well. In an ODE, the boundaries

are implicitly defined by the common vision and goal of the ecosystem. Especially in public- and business-driven

ODEs, this is set in the beginning by the platform provider and potentially also keystone actors. However, to build a

sustainable and attractive ecosystem, the voices of the actors also need to be considered, as often done implicitly in

community-driven ODEs like Wikipedia and Drupal where consensus is a driving norm for decision-making [13, 42].
Recommendation #1 for ODEs: Boundaries of the ecosystem and its underpinning common (e.g., in terms of control,
access, use, and sharing of data) follow as a consequence of the overarching vision of the ecosystem, which should be

inclusive and shaped with the input of the whole ecosystem.

4.2 Principle 2: Congruence between appropriation and provision rules and local conditions

“Appropriation rules restricting time, place, technology, and/or quantity of resource units are related to local conditions and
to provision rules requiring labor, material, and/or money.” [32]

4.2.1 Related interpretations on Digital commons: In the case of Wikipedia, the growing community has created a
decentralized structure of local groups that are responsible for distinct WikiProjects. Grouping within these projects
form what can be referred to as local jurisdictions, “within which local leadership, norms, and standards for writing are
7

xxx’22,
,

Johan Linåker and Per Runeson

agreed upon by editors familiar with a particular topic” [13]. Forte et al., in their reinterpretation, highlight the need to
consider these aspects even though central editing and policy guidelines from Wikipedia must still be considered [13].

They further highlight the perspective that these local norms may change over time.

The need for a large and decentralized community such as Wikipedia to consider local conditions is confirmed by
Viégas et al. who highlight that “instead of relying on ”one-size-fits-all” regulation, rules must be intimately associated
with the particularities of the resources they regulate” [42]. Rozas further notes, in the case of the Drupal OSS community,
an “emergence of autonomous spaces with regards to local decision-making in contributed projects and local institutions to
avoid a “one-size-fits-all” regulation” [13].

Coyle et al. interpret this principle slightly differently, focusing on transparency and understanding, rather than
adaptations to local conditions: “Transparency and better understanding of both rights and how value from data returns to
people and organisations” [6].

4.2.2 Contextualization on ODEs: The diversity of actors and the relationships in-between them affect the conditions
and form how data and related resources are shared and shaped through the joint contributions (cf. “labor, material,
and/or money” [32]). Benefits need to be weighed against the potential risks and costs of sharing data or any boundary
resource [25]. Companies, for example, commonly associate the risk of giving away differentiating value to competitors

through data sharing. A more general, but also overlapping risk concerns that of sharing integrity and confidentiality-

related information.

To manage these risks, licenses can be defined to balance how the data is permitted to be shared while still enabling

opportunities for individual and collective value creation. Among the cases studied, we have noted four ways in which

the data can be transformed before publication to address concerns and perceived risks among ecosystem actors
(aligning with e.g., [12]): 1) Adapting the currentness of the data, e.g., by only sharing historical data when the real-time
data is considered sensitive. 2) Adapting the level of processing of the data, e.g., by only providing the raw data when
processing and enrichment are considered as differentiating steps. 3) Adapting the granularity of the data, e.g., by
abstracting, anonymizing, or removing certain fields in the published data. 4) Adapting the level of openness of the data,
e.g., if it should be shared internally within the ecosystem or openly with an open data license.

4.2.3 Analysis and recommendation: The related studies of Wikipedia [13, 42] and Drupal [35] focus on the need
to adapt rules, especially for the contribution and collaborative aspects, to local needs. Both cases have very large

communities where sub-projects have emerged as a consequence, hence the specific need to consider local conditions.

The studied cases of ODEs, however, are rather small and do not have this specific concern in their current stage of

evolution. Still, they need to define feasible licenses for use and sharing, to ensure that actors in the ecosystem feel that

perceived risks are managed and that the potential for value creation persists. As highlighted by Coyle et al. [6], these

rules and processes need to be transparent and generally understood, e.g., in how they address the concerned risks.

Recommendation #2 for ODEs: Licenses and processes related to consumption and contribution to the common (i.e.,
data and related boundary resources) should address perceived risks while persisting potential for value creation for

the members of the ecosystem. As the ecosystem evolves, local needs must be considered and addressed accordingly.

4.3 Principle 3: Collective-choice arrangements

“Most individuals affected by the operational rules can participate in modifying the operational rules.” [32]

8

Sustaining Open Data as a Digital Common – Design principles for Common Pool Resources applied to Open Data Ecosystems

xxx’22,
,

4.3.1 Related interpretations on Digital commons: Forte et al. generally align in their interpretation of this principle: “In
order to best accomplish the congruence called for in principle 2, principle 3 suggests that people who are affected by the
rules of the community can participate in changing them.” [13] Viégas et al. further add that “the cost of altering rules
should be kept low” [42]. In terms of Wikipedia, both aforementioned studies describe a decision-making process that is
generally based on consensus building among those interested [13, 42]. Rozas notes in the case of Drupal that there is a
continuous ongoing process in the community in terms of inventing “ways to increase participation in the elaboration of
rules by those affected by them” [35]. A similar interpretation is echoed by Ruhaak et al. [36].

4.3.2 Contextualization on ODEs: Rules and rights for using and sharing data, as well as contributing to its evolution
are ultimately decided by the platform provider. However, the platform provider must still recognize and consider the

opinions of the ecosystem actors, especially the keystones as they are pivotal for the success and health of the ecosystem

(see principles 4–6 for discussion on the mutual monitoring, sanctioning, and conflict-resolution mechanisms).

Among our cases, we have noted both formal and informal means for setting up such governance structures and thus
we differentiate between three types of ecosystem governance structures. In organization-centric ODEs (e.g. ESS–CSDL
and JobTech), the governance is concentrated on one single organization, also constituting the platform provider. Here,

the platform provider needs to build relationships and means for the ecosystem to influence, e.g., what data is shared.
In consortium-based ODEs (e.g RoDL), several actors (often keystones) share the role of the platform provider through a
joint organization. Here, governance is set up more formally with e.g., statutes and committees that enable collective
decision-making. In community-based ODEs (e.g. OpenStreetMap), the role of a platform provider is taken on by a
community at large where governance is decentralized directly to the actors within the ecosystem whom themselves

decide on how to organize the decision-making.

4.3.3 Analysis and recommendation: All related cases are clear in that those affected by a decision should be able to
influence the decision. In Wikipedia [13] and Drupal [35], this is a consensus-based process which aligns with their

community-driven approach. For the ODEs studied, this was mainly the role of the platform provider, yet taking the

input of the ecosystem, primarily based on their level of importance for the success of the ecosystem and general

level of activity. The structure and ownership of the platform provider (considering the cases of organization-centric,

consortium-based, and community-based ODEs) further affect how the collective-choice arrangements are made.

Recommendation #3 for ODEs: Rules and overall governance structure should ideally be shaped through dialogue
among the ecosystem members, and enable influence, formal or informal, for the members both concerning the

governance, as the general collaboration related to the common.

4.4 Principle 4: Monitoring

“Monitors, who actively audit CPR conditions and appropriator behaviour, are accountable to the appropriators or are the
appropriators.” [32]

4.4.1 Related interpretations on Digital commons: Forte et al. interpret the principle much in line with Ostrom as do
Viégas et al., stating that “Individuals who monitor the commons should be accountable to the rest of the community”.
This definition aligns well with observations in the case of Wikipedia where “[t]he entire community monitors content
and if a dispute arises, it is generally resolved through discussion by the people involved in the situation” [13]. In the case
of Drupal, Rozas observed the “[e]mergence of explicit roles and processes related to quality assurance so that certain
individuals, accountable to the community, [can] monitor the commons” [35].

9

xxx’22,
,

Johan Linåker and Per Runeson

Ruhaak et al. interpret the principle for data commons and how it “includes monitoring of data production processes —

ongoing validation of data integrity, verification of data quality, — as well as monitoring data access and use” [36].

4.4.2 Contextualization on ODEs: Monitoring in terms of how rules and governance is followed is not conducted by any
external actors but is a responsibility shared between the platform provider and the ecosystem in general. The platform

provider may use diagnostics and statistics connected to the platform to monitor how the data is used, as employed by

the Swedish Public Employment Service in the case of JobTech. By also mandating use of API keys, they can further

monitor e.g., the amount of calls to API:s to a specific user, and require acceptance of any terms and conditions.

From the ecosystem perspective, actors can collectively monitor how the platform provider abides by the defined

rules and governance structure, and how they can exercise their influence on e.g., what data is shared.

4.4.3 Analysis and recommendation: In the communities of Wikipedia [13] and Drupal [13], the community monitors
itself through the transparent and consensus-based collaboration and governance processes. Similar observations regard

the ODEs studied. Although, there may not necessarily be equal conditions in terms of monitoring each other, both the

platform provider and the members of the ecosystem both have the possibility to monitor and check up on each other,

and act accordingly. Traits that are important for a common trust to reside between the members, which is especially

central in smaller ecosystems where co-opetition is present, i.e., collaboration between competitors. As Ruhaak et al.

point out, monitoring should also include the production and collaboration regarding the common [36].

Recommendation #4 for ODEs: Monitoring concerning the orchestration, as well as the consumption, and general
collaboration and production related to the common should be performed equally by both those facilitating an ecosystem

(i.e., the platform provider), and the members of the ecosystem.

4.5 Principle 5: Graduated sanctions

“Appropriators who violate operational rules are likely to be assessed graduated sanctions (depending on the seriousness and
context of the offence) by other appropriators, by officials accountable to these appropriators, or both.” [32]

4.5.1 Related interpretations on Digital commons: The interpretation by Forte et al. highlights how “community members
actively monitor and sanction one another when behavior is found to conflict with community rules”. [13]

In the Wikipedia community, “[w]hen behavior-related policy is broken, a series of graduated sanctions can be imposed
that begin with the posting of warnings and can lead to being banned from the site” [13]. If the dispute can not be resolved
locally in the specific project, the case is transferred and managed by a central entity. In the Drupal community, a code

of conduct listing different sanctions has been developed and is enforced collectively by the community. Tweeting

derogatory comments about a presenter at a community event may e.g., result in banning from the event [35].

Coyle et al. emphasize concrete examples of sanctions related to misuse of the data: “Enforcement of a range of
consequences for the misuse of data, ranging from the withdrawal of access permissions to fines and other penalties” [6].
The interpretation by Ruhaak et al. aligns with the original definition [36].

4.5.2 Contextualization on ODEs: As with monitoring, graduated sanctions can be exercised both from the platform
provider and ecosystem actors, respectively. The platform provider has the option of disabling or limiting access to the

data shared via their platform, especially if they have enforced the use of API keys. In the case of JobTech, API keys

have, however, mainly been introduced to communicate any events that might affect the users, e.g., the deprecation

or revision of an API that might affect business-critical applications among its users. Another means is to limit the

influence that a specific actor may have.

10

Sustaining Open Data as a Digital Common – Design principles for Common Pool Resources applied to Open Data Ecosystems

xxx’22,
,

The ecosystem actors, on the other hand, may enforce informal sanctions by individually or collectively voicing

their opinions, or ultimately leaving the ecosystem. This would hurt the platform provider who is dependent on an

ecosystem of actors that use and add value to its platform. The actors may, e.g., choose to join an existing ecosystem, or

create a new ecosystem, similar to the concept of forking in terms of OSS [15], a maneuver that is associated with many

risks and costs. An alternative sanction is to limit any contribution to the platform and shared resources, e.g., in terms

of data – in our cases alarm data in ESS–CSDL, image data in RoDL or job ads in JobTech.

4.5.3 Analysis and recommendation: As noted in relation to monitoring, definition, and provisioning of sanctions are
done collectively by the communities in Wikipedia [13] and Drupal [35]. In the ODEs studied, the types of sanctions

that can be provided differ between the platform provider and the rest of the ecosystem members. However, relating

to Principle #3, there should be a common discussion and understanding of what sanctions apply and under what

conditions. As highlighted by Ruhaak et al. [36], sanctions should consider misconduct both regarding the consumption,

and general collaboration and production related to the common.

Recommendation #5 for ODEs: Graduated sanctions should be discussed and decided on collectively by those facilitating
an ecosystem (i.e., the platform provider), and the members of the ecosystem. However, different sanctions may still be

available to each side even though these should be considered a last resort.

4.6 Principle 6: Conflict-resolution mechanisms

“Appropriators and their officials have rapid access to low cost local arenas to resolve conflicts among appropriators or
between appropriators and officials.” [32]

4.6.1 Related interpretations on Digital commons: The interpretation by Forte et al. aligns with the original definition,
as does Viégas et al. who more concisely say that “community members should have rapid access to low-cost local arenas to
resolve conflicts”. In Wikipedia, most disputes are managed in a decentralized and local setting, a trend that is considered
a consequence given the rapid growth of the community [13]. In Drupal, there are mechanisms to facilitate conflict

resolution which is also managed primarily in the local working groups [35].

Ruhaak et al. phrase the principle as: “When conflict arises in a data commons, there needs to be an effective, inexpensive,
and otherwise accessible way to handle that conflict. In addition, a data commons needs to decide and make clear which
conflicts will be handled internally and which ones should be resolved externally, for instance by going to court”. [36]

4.6.2 Contextualization on ODEs: To enable conflict resolution as well as rulemaking and collaboration in general,
there is a need for trust, both between the actors and towards the shared data and its related resources. This can be

especially important in ecosystems where there are direct or indirect competitors (as in JobTech and RoDL). Among the

cases studied, we have noticed the importance of a neutral platform provider with the possibility to build this trust

within the ecosystem. In JobTech, the Swedish Public Employment Service has taken on this role in the context of an

organization-centric governance structure. In RoDL and its consortium-based governance structure, an independent

body through which multiple actors interact provided a neutral ground for discussions and conflict resolutions.

In ODEs with a community-based governance structure, conflicts are managed through community-defined norms

and processes. OpenStreetMap has a consensus-based approach to addressing any disputes, e.g., regarding a certain
edit to their map data. Data trusts is another solution proposed by Coyle et al. [6], which provides a legal structure
that can host any shared data for its users. The OpenStreetMap foundation can be likened to a data trust as it holds

11

xxx’22,
,

Johan Linåker and Per Runeson

the intellectual property rights for the OpenStreetMap community but is not part of the governance structure, as is

commonly the case for open source software-focused foundations.

4.6.3 Analysis and recommendation: Both Wikipedia [13] and Drupal [35] manage most conflicts in local settings due
to their size and decentralized organization, similar to the example of OpenStreetMap. In the ODEs studied, which are

considerably smaller in size, conflicts are managed centrally by, or through the platform provider, both in the case of

organization-centric and consortium-based ODEs. Ruhaak et al. stress that it should also be defined what conflicts are

managed internally and which ones should be managed externally, e.g., in court [36] although the latter is somewhat

alien to the community context.

Recommendation #6 for ODEs: A neutral actor or common body (potentially the platform provider) can help in
establishing a common trust and resolving potential conflicts in the ecosystem. As an ecosystem evolves, a more

decentralized process may need to be considered.

4.7 Principle 7: Minimal Recognition of rights to organize

“The rights of appropriators to devise their own institutions are not challenged by external governmental authorities.” [32]

4.7.1 Related interpretations on Digital commons: Forte et al. reinterpret the principle as: “Local jurisdiction to create and
enforce rules should be recognized by external, central authorities.” [13] Interestingly, Forte et al. consider this principle in
the context of the local projects (or “jurisdictions”) within the overarching Wikipedia project in contrast to Ostrom et al.,
who in traditional commons consider the external government and local authorities. In Drupal, there is an “[e]mergence
of local jurisdiction and acknowledgment by the most centralised authorities of creation and enforcement of local rules” [35].
This development can be observed both in the language-specific communities, as well as among the contributed modules

that connect to the Drupal Core OSS project.

Coyle et al. emphasize the need for a “comprehensive data strategy and institutional/regulatory framework” [6]. In the
context of data commons, as per Ruhaak et al., “this principle encourages us to understand how far the decisions we make
about the collection and use of data are in line with, for instance, data protection regulations” [36].

4.7.2 Contextualization on ODEs: An ODE needs legitimacy to attract actors and stay competitive with other ecosystems.
The legitimacy, as well as attractiveness, relates to the value an ODE can offer its actors, e.g., through the data being

shared, and the related collaboration. For ODEs focused on open government data, public organizations (as with JobTech)

can provide the legitimacy and foundation for the trust needed to establish a sustainable and long-term ecosystem. An

ODE must also respect regulations and aspects that might limit the kind of data that may be shared, or how.

4.7.3 Analysis and recommendation: This principle is contextualized both in the case of Wikipedia [13] and Drupal [35]
inside each community. This comes naturally given the size and decentralized nature of the communities, creating the

dynamics and need for respect between central and local governance. The contexts of the studied ODEs align more

with the original definition by Ostrom in terms of a need to be recognized by the external environment (not necessarily

local authorities as stated by Ostrom). Such recognition may be built by including necessary parties as members of

the ecosystem, e.g., public sector organizations or actors who could be considered potential keystones. As highlighted

by Ruhaak et al., one also needs to consider the relevant regulations, e.g., in terms of data protection regulations [36].

Further, as highlighted by Principle #2, an ecosystem also needs to consider risks perceived by the members and how

these can be addressed.

12

Sustaining Open Data as a Digital Common – Design principles for Common Pool Resources applied to Open Data Ecosystems

xxx’22,
,

Recommendation #7 for ODEs: External recognition is connected to the attractiveness of the ecosystem and its
underpinning common, and the value they can provide to new and existing members. The ecosystem must also ensure

that regulations are met and perceived risks from its members are addressed as highlighted in Principle #2.

4.8 Principle 8: Nested enterprises (for CPRs that are part of larger systems)

“Appropriation, provision, monitoring, enforcement, conflict resolution, and governance activities are organized in multiple
layers of nested enterprises.” [32]

4.8.1 Related interpretations on Digital commons: This principle only relates to CPRs that are part of the larger
ecosystem and overarching governance. Forte et al. define it as: “By forming multiple nested layers of organization,
communities can address issues that affect resource management differently at broader and very local levels.” [13]

Again, this principle can be contextualized in the context of the overarching Wikipedia community, and how its
governance structure considers the local projects within [13]. In Drupal, Rozas noted an “[o]verall emergence of socio-
technical systems of contribution to address issues that affect the common resources differently at wider and local levels”, e.g.,
through the emergence of international, regional, and local conferences and meetups where members of the community

and concerned sub-communities can meet and discuss matters of importance [35].

Concerning data commons, “this principle can refer to a possible need for one data commons to interoperate with another,
or to break up one large commons into smaller, nested commons that interoperate with one another. Doing so would allow
each smaller commons to make decisions that better reflect their circumstance and match a narrowly defined purpose” [36].

4.8.2 Contextualization on ODEs: It is not uncommon that an ODE is part of a larger and more nested ecosystem. In
the case of JobTech, the taxonomy of skill and work titles on one hand relates to other data sets such as those defining

types of education maintained by the National Agency for Education. On another hand, the taxonomy data set makes

up a Swedish translation and contextualization of a more abstract taxonomy data set for the European Union, which in

turn relates to an even more abstract international taxonomy.

4.8.3 Analysis and recommendation: In both the Wikipedia [13] and the Drupal communities [35], this principle is
contextualized as the different layers that emerge due to their large size and decentralized nature. Again, for the ODEs

studied, which are all considerably smaller in size, this principle rather refers to how an ODE relates to connecting

ODEs, on a similar or differing level of abstraction as with the example of public transport data. This aspect is also

highlighted by Ruhaak et al. [36] as the potential need to interoperate with other ODEs, or even break one up into

smaller ones. In some sense, similar to what has happened in Wikipedia and Drupal, where smaller sub-communities

have emerged forming new and lower levels within the overarching community. An ODE may, hence, as it matures

turn into a nested enterprise itself with layers, and local jurisdictions emerging underneath.

Recommendation #8 for ODEs: Interoperability and collaboration should be sought out by connecting ecosystems with
aligning commons. Ecosystems should further be open to internal sub-groupings emerging as the ecosystem evolves, or

even breaking up an ecosystem if appropriate, e.g., enabling smaller commons with a narrower focus.

5 DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

5.1 Natural and digital commons

When reanalyzing the ODE cases as digital commons [29], in relation to natural commons, one difference sticks out,

namely whether the resource is subtractable as hinted by Ostrom’s definition of a CPR [33]. A subtractable resource is

13

xxx’22,
,

Johan Linåker and Per Runeson

reduced through the consumption by one on the cost of others. If non-renewable, the resource may risk depletion. A

non-subtractable resource, on the other hand, can be consumed by multiple stakeholders without being diminished.

For natural commons, e.g water supply in a well or creek, the dilemma of the commons is clearly prevalent. If one

landowner along the creek taps too much water for irrigation, the creek will dry out for the downstream land owners.

The same phenomenon is observable at multiple levels, from the small village well, to huge-scale power dam projects,

e.g. in Ethiopia [43]. Consequently, commons must focus on regulating consumption, and sanctions taken against

those who break the regulations. Natural commons resources may also suffer from under-consumption, e.g. if too few

creatures graze a common pasture, bushes may take over the land or the ground may be malnourished due to lack of

fertilization from the creep if too small herds use the pastures. However, the primary concern is over-consumption.

For digital commons, e.g. OSS [23, 39] and open data [6, 36], the dilemma of the commons is different. Digital

commons are primarily non-subtractable. Software is not worn out by being run, and data is not consumed by being

copied to new databases. On the contrary, OSS and open data are improved by utilization. More users of an OSS means

that more eyes spot potential faults, and more stakeholders have an interest in having these faults fixed. Thus the

probability that some stakeholders actually will provide labor to fix the fault is higher. For open data, similar patterns

can be seen, e.g. when users of OpenStreetMap spot faults in the map data and propose corrections. Further, they map

the unchartered territory and make this data available to other consumers.

However, this highlights another aspect of digital commons that is very much subtractable. That is the labor needed

for the collective action to properly maintain the digital common. For example, if digital preservation efforts such as the

Software Heritage [10] would fail if a lack in preservation efforts arises. Equally, if an OSS is not maintained properly

by the community, vulnerabilities may risk being introduced and dependencies break. In the case of open data, ML

training sets may risk becoming invalid, or map data incorrect as its physical counterpart is altered.

As a community grows, and so the appropriation of a common, the demand grows for maintenance labor that

can provide support for the community, e.g., by answering questions [11]. Effort required to manage and coordinate

collective action for maintaining the common may also risk to scale out of proportion. Or as put by Jullien and Roudaut,
“the available brain time of peers is not extensible, therefore rival, even if it is a renewable resource” [23]. The collective
action producing and maintaining the common, may in this sense itself be considered as a CPR where the “brain time”

makes up the resource system that needs governing and oversight.

Communities, hence, need to design their governance in a way that manages a potential increase in effort as

appropriation and provisioning grows (as in the examples of Wikipedia [13, 42] and Drupal [35]), while also reducing

barriers to entry and enabling new members of a community to engage and start contributing to the collective action as

frictionless as possible [23]. We synthesize our findings into two propositions:

P1) As appropriation of a digital common grows, so does the demand for labor required to contribute to and manage

the contributions to the collective action, underpinning the common.

P2) To enable sustainability of a digital common, governance must consider both how to promote and manage

contributions, within the available frame of maintenance labor of a community.

5.2 Design principles for digital commons

As a consequence of the difference between natural and digital resources, we have tailored some of Ostrom’s design

principles conceptually, while others only have to be contextualized into the digital domain.

Two principles remain principally the same for digital commons, #1 defined boundaries, and #3 collective-choice

arrangements. In both natural and digital commons, there is a need for clear scope definitions and the democratic

14

Sustaining Open Data as a Digital Common – Design principles for Common Pool Resources applied to Open Data Ecosystems

xxx’22,
,

aspects of influencing the common. The principles may be implemented differently: the boundaries of the artificially

created artifacts of digital commons are scoped by their vision, while boundaries of the natural commons are related to

physical entities and stakeholders [4]. Similarly, the mechanisms for enabling influence from stakeholders are different

in the digital and the physical world. Still, in both cases, the dialogue, not its medium is the key.

Another three of the principles are also principally the same, but since the digital media are so different, the principles

are conceptually modified with respect to what is local and what is global. For principles #6, conflict resolution, #7,

rights to organize, and #8, nested enterprises, the commons are technically global (via the internet) but there is little

global-wide jurisdiction to align to. Thus, local working groups are created e.g. within the global Wikipedia community,

to decentralize the governance [13, 42]. This is in contrast to natural commons, where the scope of the common is
physically bound to a country or a region [18]. Principally, also natural commons are global, e.g. 𝐶𝑂2 and water
resources, but we have not seen commons principles applied at this scale.

The remaining three principles are conceptually different. Principle #2 on appropriation and provision is for natural

commons focused on over-consumption, while governance of digital commons must monitor under-consumption

and ensure the incentives for new contributions to the commons, whether it is software or data. For principles #4 on

monitoring and #5 on sanctions, the platform provider in the digital common has a central role, since monitoring and

sanctions are technically connected to features of the platform. The APIs of the platform may handle access rights, and

sanctions can be implemented as withdrawn API keys, giving the platform provider’s powerful tools to manage the

common [26]. However, since the stakeholders are needed for new contributions to the common, this helps balance the

power between the facilitators (platform providers) and members (users) of the common.

5.3 Limitations and Future work

The applicability of Ostrom’s design principles to digital commons may be questioned as they were originally elicited for

small and locally based natural commons. However, as proposed by Benkler [4], and explored by others [6, 13, 35, 36, 42],

they may very well prove applicable to digital commons, although with some modifications as hinted by this study.

A further aspect concerns when open data can be considered a digital common, and by extension, to which ODEs

that our recommendations are applicable. Many authors (e.g., [4, 23, 29]) highlight the characteristics of co-creation

and co-ownership. A (hypothetical) case of an organization-centric business-driven ODE where a company release

open data as part of their business model for public consumption may hence be questioned. However, per our definition

of an ODE, if there is no collaborative component, or networked group of actors present with a common vision (see

Section 2.1), it is questionable if this hypothetical case can be considered as an ODE. Our recommendations may instead

be considered as guidance for how such a company can organize an ODE and tailor its governance structure to transform

the open data into (or resemble aspects of) a “digital common” and thereby extract the potential benefits that (may)

follow. Research into the gray area of what constitutes a digital common is a topic warranting further attention.

It should further be noted that our review of related interpretations of Ostrom design principles is limited to the

referred works [13, 35, 42], and their application of the principles when describing the governance of their respective

cases. We hence acknowledge that our coverage of, e.g., social and cultural aspects that also affect the governance, i.e.,

the social norms practiced, are not extensively covered, and is considered as a topic for future research.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

Thanks to professor Krister Andersson, University of Colorado at Boulder, for advice and encouragement in applying

the commons concept to the digital domain.

15

xxx’22,
,

Johan Linåker and Per Runeson

REFERENCES
[1] Carina Alves, Joyce Oliveira, and Slinger Jansen. 2018. Understanding Governance Mechanisms and Health in Software Ecosystems: A Systematic
Literature Review. In Enterprise Information Systems, Slimane Hammoudi, Michał Śmiałek, Olivier Camp, and Joaquim Filipe (Eds.). Springer
International Publishing, Cham, 517–542. https://doi.org/10.5220/0006269402150226

[2] Yochai Benkler. 2002. Coase’s penguin, or, linux and "the nature of the firm". Yale law journal 12, 3 (2002), 369–446. https://doi.org/10.2307/1562247
[3] Yochai Benkler. 2005. Common Wisdom: Peer Production of Educational Materials, Center for Open and Sustainable Learning. http://nrs.harvard.

edu/urn-3:HUL.InstRepos:37077901

[4] Yochai Benkler. 2014. Between Spanish huertas and the open road: a tale of two commons? Governing knowledge commons 69 (2014). https:

//doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199972036.001.0001

[5] Michael Cox, Gwen Arnold, and Sergio Villamayor Tomás. 2010. A review of design principles for community-based natural resource management.

Ecology and Society 15 (2010), 38. Issue 4. http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol15/iss4/art38/

[6] Diane Coyle, Stephanie Diepeveen, and Julia Wdowin. 2020. The Value of Data summary report. Technical Report. The Bennett Institute, Cambridge.
[7] Daniel Curto-Millet and Alberto Corsín Jiménez. 2022. The sustainability of open source commons. European Journal of Information Systems (2022),

1–19. https://doi.org/10.1080/0960085X.2022.2046516

[8] Paul B. De Laat. 2007. Governance of open source software: State of the art. Journal of Management & Governance 11, 2 (2007), 165–177.

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10997-007-9022-9

[9] Ivan De Noni, Andrea Ganzaroli, and Luigi Orsi. 2013. The evolution of OSS governance: A dimensional comparative analysis. Scandinavian Journal

of Management 29, 3 (2013), 247–263. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scaman.2012.10.003

[10] Roberto Di Cosmo and Stefano Zacchiroli. 2017. Software heritage: Why and how to preserve software source code. In iPRES 2017-14th International

Conference on Digital Preservation. 1–10.

[11] Nadia Eghbal. 2016. Roads and bridges. The Unseen labor behind our digital infrastructure (2016). https://www.fordfoundation.org/media/2976/roads-

and-bridges-the-unseen-labor-behind-our-digital-infrastructure.pdf

[12] Tobias Enders, Clemens Wolff, and Gerhard Satzger. 2020. Knowing What to Share: Selective Revealing in Open Data. In European Conference on

Information Systems 2020 Research-in-Progress Paper. https://aisel.aisnet.org/ecis2020_rip/11

[13] Andrea Forte, Vanesa Larco, and Amy Bruckman. 2009. Decentralization in Wikipedia governance. Journal of Management Information Systems 26,

1 (2009), 49–72. https://doi.org/10.2753/MIS0742-1222260103

[14] Mayo Fuster Morell. 2014. Governance of online creation communities for the building of digital commons: Viewed through the framework of the
institutional analysis and development. In Governing knowledge commons, Brett M. Frischmann, Michael J. Madison, and Katherine J. Strandburg
(Eds.). Oxford University Press, 281. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2842586

[15] Jonas Gamalielsson and Björn Lundell. 2014. Sustainability of Open Source software communities beyond a fork: How and why has the LibreOffice

project evolved? Journal of Systems and Software 89 (2014), 128–145. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2013.11.1077

[16] Matt Germonprez, Julie E. Kendall, Kenneth E. Kendall, and Brett Young. 2014. Collectivism, creativity, competition, and control in open source
software development: Reflections on the emergent governance of the SPDX working group. International Journal of Information Systems and
Management 1, 1-2 (2014), 125–145. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJISAM.2014.062290

[17] Garrett Hardin. 1968. The Tragedy of the Commons. Science 162, 3859 (1968), 1243–1248. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.162.3859.1243
[18] Charlotte Hess. 2008. Mapping the new commons. In The Twelfth Biennial Conference of the International Association for the Study of the Commons

(14-18 July). Cheltenham, UK. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1356835

[19] Charlotte Hess and Elinor Ostrom. 2006. A framework for analysing the microbiological commons. International Social Science Journal 58, 188

(2006), 335–349. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2451.2006.00622.x

[20] Marco Iansiti and Roy Levien. 2004. The keystone advantage: what the new dynamics of business ecosystems mean for strategy, innovation, and

sustainability. Harvard Business Review Press, Boston.

[21] Anne Immonen, Marko Palviainen, and Eila Ovaska. 2014. Requirements of an open data based business ecosystem. IEEE Access 2 (2014), 88–103.

https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2014.2302872

[22] Slinger Jansen, Anthony Finkelstein, and Sjaak Brinkkemper. 2009. A sense of community: A research agenda for software ecosystems. In 31st
International Conference on Software Engineering - Companion Volume (ICSE’09). IEEE, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 187–190. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE-
COMPANION.2009.5070978

[23] Nicolas Jullien and Karine Roudaut. 2020. Digital knowledge commons: Definition and conditions of existence. Innovations 63, 3 (2020), 69–93.

https://doi.org/10.3917/inno.063.0069 Quote in translation from French.

[24] Fotis Kitsios, Nikolaos Papachristos, and Maria Kamariotou. 2017. Business models for open data ecosystem: challenges and motivations for

entrepreneurship and innovation. In 19th Conference on Business Informatics, Vol. 1. IEEE, 398–407. https://doi.org/10.1109/CBI.2017.51

[25] Johan Linåker and Björn Regnell. 2020. What to share, when, and where: balancing the objectives and complexities of open source software

contributions. Empirical Software Engineering 25, 5 (2020), 3799–3840. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10664-020-09855-2

[26] Johan Linåker and Per Runeson. 2021. How to Enable Collaboration in Open Government Data Ecosystems: A Public Platform Provider’s Perspective.

JeDEM - eJournal of eDemocracy and Open Government 13, 1 (2021), 1–30. https://doi.org/10.29379/jedem.v13i1.634

16

Sustaining Open Data as a Digital Common – Design principles for Common Pool Resources applied to Open Data Ecosystems

xxx’22,
,

[27] Juho Lindman, Tomi Kinnari, and Matti Rossi. 2015. Business roles in the emerging open-data ecosystem.

IEEE Software 33, 5 (2015), 54–59.

https://doi.org/10.1109/MS.2015.25

[28] M Lynne Markus. 2007. The governance of free/open source software projects: monolithic, multidimensional, or configurational? Journal of

Management & Governance 11, 2 (2007), 151–163. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10997-007-9021-x

[29] Mayo Fuster Morell. 2010. Governance of online creation communities: Provision of infrastructure for the building of digital commons. Ph.D. Dissertation.

European University Institute Fiesole. http://hdl.handle.net/1814/14709

[30] Kumiyo Nakakoji, Yasuhiro Yamamoto, Yoshiyuki Nishinaka, Kouichi Kishida, and Yunwen Ye. 2002. Evolution patterns of open-source software
systems and communities. In Proc. int. workshop on Principles of software evolution. ACM, Orlando, Florida, 76–85. https://doi.org/10.1145/512035.
512055

[31] Siobhán O’Mahony and Fabrizio Ferraro. 2007. The emergence of governance in an open source community. Academy of Management Journal 50, 5

(2007), 1079–1106. https://doi.org/10.5465/amj.2007.27169153

[32] Elinor Ostrom. 1990. Governing the commons: the evolution of institutions for collective action. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
[33] Elinor Ostrom. 2000. Collective action and the evolution of social norms. Journal of economic perspectives 14, 3 (2000), 137–158. https://doi.org/10.

1257/jep.14.3.137

[34] Siobhán O’Mahony. 2003. Guarding the commons: how community managed software projects protect their work. Research policy 32, 7 (2003),

1179–1198. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0048-7333(03)00048-9

[35] David Rozas. 2017. Self-organisation in Commons-Based Peer Production. Drupal: “the drop is always moving”. Ph.D. Dissertation. University of Surrey,
United Kingdom. https://openresearch.surrey.ac.uk/esploro/outputs/doctoral/Self-organisation-in-commons-based-peer-production--Drupal--the-
drop-is-always-moving/99512497702346

[36] Anouk Ruhaak, Greg Blooma, Angie Raymond, Willa Tavernier, Divya Siddarth, Gary Motz, and Melanie Dulong de Rosnay. 2021. A Practical
Framework for Applying Ostrom’s Principles to Data Commons Governance. https://foundation.mozilla.org/en/blog/a-practical-framework-for-
applying-ostroms-principles-to-data-commons-governance/ last visited 2021-12-17.

[37] Per Runeson, Thomas Olsson, and Johan Linåker. 2021. Open Data Ecosystems – an empirical investigation into an emerging industry collaboration

concept. Journal of Systems and Software 182 (2021), 111088. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2021.111088

[38] Marcelo Iury S Oliveira, Glória de Fátima Barros Lima, and Bernadette Farias Lóscio. 2019. Investigations into data ecosystems: a systematic mapping

study. Knowledge and Information Systems 61, 2 (2019), 589–630. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10115-018-1323-6

[39] Charles M Schweik and Robert C English. 2012. Internet success: a study of open-source software commons. MIT Press.
[40] Maha Shaikh and Ola Henfridsson. 2017. Governing open source software through coordination processes. Information and Organization 27, 2

(2017), 116–135. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infoandorg.2017.04.001

[41] Klaas-Jan Stol and Brian Fitzgerald. 2015. Theory-oriented software engineering. Science of Computer Programming 101 (2015), 79–98. https:

//doi.org/10.1016/j.scico.2014.11.010

[42] Fernanda B Viégas, Martin Wattenberg, and Matthew M McKeon. 2007. The hidden order of Wikipedia. In International conference on Online

communities and social computing. Springer, 445–454. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-73257-0_49

[43] Wikipedia. [n.d.]. Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grand_Ethiopian_Renaissance_Dam last visited 2022-06-14.

17

