2
2
0
2

g
u
A
1

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
1
2
7
0
0
.
8
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

DOMAIN ANALYSIS OF ETHICAL, SOCIAL AND
ENVIRONMENTAL ACCOUNTING METHODS

VERSION 1

Vijanti Ramautar

Department of Information and Computing Sciences
Utrecht University
Princetonplein 5, 3584 CC Utrecht
v.d.ramautar@uu.nl

Sergio España
Department of Information and Computing Sciences
Utrecht University
Princetonplein 5, 3584 CC Utrecht
s.espana@uu.nl

August 2, 2022

ABSTRACT

Ethical, social and environmental accounting is the practice of assessing and reporting organisations’
performance on environmental, social and governance topics. There are ample methods that describe
how to perform such sustainability assessments. This report presents a domain analysis of ethical,
social and environmental accounting methods. Our analysis contains 21 methods. Each method
is modelled as a process deliverable diagram. The diagrams have been validated by experts in the
methods. The diagrams lay the foundation for further analysis and software development. In this
report, we touch upon the ethical, social and environmental accounting method ontology that has
been created based on the domain analysis.

1

Introduction

Ethical, social and environmental accounting (ESEA) methods guide responsible entities in performing sustainability
assessments and reporting on the assessment results. Typically organisations report on their performance regarding
ethical, social and environmental dimensions. The contributions of this report include a detailed domain analysis of
21 ESEA methods. For each, method, we propose a process deliverable diagram (PDD) that depicts the method from
two perspectives: the process part focuses on the activities of the method, and the deliverable part focuses on the
products used as input or produced as output by the activities (thus constituting a conceptual data model for the method)
van de Weerd and Brinkkemper [2009].The diagrams are created as part of the Software for Organisation Responsibility
research line. We base the models on method documentation and ofﬁcial information published by the entity that
developed the method. The PDDs are validated with experts in the respective ESEA methods. After the validation
interviews, we update and improve the PDDs if necessary. The validated PDDs are used to create activity and concept
comparisons. For this, we adapt the method comparison approach [van de Weerd et al., 2007]. We provide a discussion
of the results and present a metamodel that abstracts the 21 ESEA methods. We name this the openESEA metamodel
since it acts as a domain ontology that serves as the foundation for engineering the openESEA domain-speciﬁc language
(DSL). The openESEA metamodel and the DSL are presented in a technical report [Ramautar and España, 2022a]. An
earlier version of the metamodel and DSL are presented in España et al. [2019].

The report structure is the following. Section 2 lists the research questions and provides an overview of the research
method. Section 3 contains the domain analysis of ESEA methods, including all PDDs and brief descriptions of each of
the ESEA methods. Section 4 discusses the results of the domain analysis of ESEA methods. The result includes the
openESEA metamodel. In Section 5 we present the conclusions of this research.

 
 
 
 
 
 
ESEA methods

VERSION 1

2 Research method

2.1 Research questions

This report answers the following research questions.

RQ1 What is the state of the art in ethical, social and environmental accounting methods?

•RQ1.1 Which ESEA methods exist?
RQ1.2 What are the commonalities and differences in ESEA methods in terms of the process and data structure?

RQ2 What are requirements for engineering a be part of a domain-speciﬁc modelling language for specifying ESEA

methods?

•RQ2.1 Which method constructs should be part of a domain ontology for ESEA methods?

2.2 Overview of the research method

Figure 1 provides an overview of the research method. We have performed a multi-vocal literature review (activity A1)
to search for ESEA methods. We collected both scientiﬁc and grey literature because in this domain we ﬁnd much
valuable information coming from practitioners Garousi et al. [2016]. Practitioners can be part of networks of social
enterprises such as B Corporations BLab [2018] and institutions such as the United Nations Williams [2004].

Figure 1: An overview of the research method

For each ESEA method identiﬁed in the literature, we have searched for and collected as much documentation as
possible (activity A2). We are interested in sources of diverse nature, such as method manuals, standards related to the
methods, websites providing instructions to users, tools supporting the methods, examples of the application of the
methods (e.g. sustainability reports from companies applying the method).

Based on the collected documentation in activity A2 we have created a process deliverable diagram for each ESEA
method (activity A3). The PDDs are validated with experts of the methods (activity A4). In the validation interview we
present experts with the PDDs and ask them whether the process activities are complete and modelled in the correct
order. Additionally, we ask them to validate whether all relevant deliverables are present in the PDD. After the validation
interviews we improve and redesign the PDDs (activity A5) based on the expert feedback. Based on the validated PDDs
we create the openESEA metamodel Ramautar and España [2022a].

3 Domain analysis of ethical, social and environmental methods

The following sections give a brief explanation of each of the analysed ESEA method. After the explanation the PDD
of the corresponding method is depicted. For each PDD we have multiple versions, since ESEA methods evolve and so
does our knowledge of said methods. In this report we present the latest versions of each of the method diagrams. Most
diagrams are validated with experts on the method. However, not all diagrams are yet validated. Table 1 contains a list
of all analysed ESEA methods.

3.1 AA1000AS

The AA1000 Assurance Standard (AA1000AS v3) is a method used by sustainability professionals for sustainability-
related assurance engagements, to assess the nature and extent to which an organisation adheres to the AccountAbility
Principles AccountAbility [2020]. Initially we classiﬁed this method as an ESEA method. Currently we classify the
method as an assurance standard, which covers the last part of the ESEA process.

2

ESEA methods

VERSION 1

Figure 2: The PDD of AA1000AS

3

ESEA methods

VERSION 1

3.2 B Impact Assessment

The B Impact Assessment BLab [2018] is a method developed by the not-for proﬁt organisation B Lab. Application
of the B Impact Assessment can result in an ofﬁcial B Corporation certiﬁcation. In order to achieve the certiﬁcation,
organisation should meet the legal requirements and score at least 80 of the 200 points on the assessment. It is a private
certiﬁcation of for-proﬁt companies, distinct from the legal designation as a Beneﬁt corporation. B Corp certiﬁcation is
conferred by B Lab, a global nonproﬁt organisation.

Figure 3: The PDD of the B Impact Assessment

4

ESEA methods

VERSION 1

3.3 CDP

The CDP (formaly know as the Carbon Disclosure Project) is an international non-proﬁt organisation based in the
United Kingdom, Japan, India, China, Germany and the United States of America that helps companies and cities
disclose their environmental impact CDP [2021]. The PDD depicts the process of applying the CDP company programs.
CDP (for companies) has three corporate questionnaires; climate change, forests and water security. The questionnaires
provide a framework for companies to provide environmental information to their stakeholders covering governance
and policy, risks and opportunity management, environmental targets and strategy and scenario analysis.

Figure 4: The PDD of the CDP method

5

ESEA methods

VERSION 1

3.4 Common Good Balance Sheet

The Common Good Matrix is a framework for the evaluation of business activities and an aid for organisational
development Felber et al. [2019]. It describes 20 Common Good themes and gives guidance on how to evaluate based
on Common Good principles. A Common Good Report is a comprehensive evaluation of a company‘s contribution
to the common good, and is prepared as part of the reporting process. It should include a description of how the
company‘s activities relate to each of the 20 common good themes. This will show how developed each value is within
the company. Each theme describes how the individual values apply to the relevant stakeholder group. The Certiﬁcate
documents an externally audited evaluation of the individual themes, gives an, and presents this in the layout of the
Matrix. Together, the Common Good Report and Certiﬁcate represent the Common Good Balance Sheet.

Figure 5: The PDD of the CGBS method

6

ESEA methods

VERSION 1

3.5 EFQM Model

The European Foundation for Quality Management (EFQM) Model, is a self-assessment framework for measuring the
strengths and areas for improvement of an organisation across all of its activities Nabitz et al. [2000]. Figure 6 shows
the diagram of the self-assessment process and the corresponding deliverables.

Figure 6: The PDD of the EFQM method

7

ESEA methods

VERSION 1

3.6 Ecovadis

Ecovadis was established in 2007. The company offers an environmental sustainability ratings platform to assess
corporate social responsibility and sustainable procurement Ecovadis [2021]. Figure 7 depicts the PDD of the
sustainability assessment method offered by Ecovadis.

Figure 7: The PDD of the Ecovadis method

8

ESEA methods

VERSION 1

3.7 Fair Trade Software Foundation (FTSF) certiﬁcation

Fair Trade is a social movement that aims to help producers in developing countries through partnerships promoting
and selling their products. Fair Trade Software extends this concept into the software industry, whilst carefully adhering
to the ten commonly accepted Fair Trade Principles established by the World Fair Trade Organization. A preliminary
version of the FTSF certiﬁcation method, that was designed in collaboration with FTSF stakeholders, is depicted in the
PDD. The method has not yet been implemented.

Figure 8: The PDD of the FTSF method

9

ESEA methods

VERSION 1

3.8 Greenhouse Gas Protocol

The Greenhouse Gas Protocol (GHG) Protocol Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard provides requirements
and guidance for companies and other organisations, such as NGOs, government agencies, and universities, that are
preparing a corporate-level GHG emissions inventory Wbcsd [2004].

Figure 9: The PDD of the GHG protocol method

10

ESEA methods

VERSION 1

3.9 Data Centre Assessment

The Data Centre Assessment by Green IT Switzerland is a questionnaire, that assesses the maturity of data centres with
regard to Green IT best practices. The questionnaire is made up of a hierarchical set of pages. Each page contains
information and / or questions. Pages can be ﬁlled out in any order. The results of the assessment are available at any
time, even if not all questions are answered yet.

Figure 10: The PDD of the Green IT Assessment method

11

ESEA methods

VERSION 1

3.10 GRI Standards

The GRI Standards help organisations understand their outward impacts on the economy, environment, and society,
including those on human rights GRI [2019]. This increases accountability and enhances transparency on their
contribution to sustainable development. The GRI Standards are a modular system comprised of three series of
Standards to be used together: Universal Standards, Sector Standards, and Topic Standards. Organisations can either
use the GRI Standards to prepare a sustainability report in accordance with the Standards or use selected Standards, or
parts of their content, to report information for speciﬁc users or purposes, such as reporting their climate change impacts
for their investors and consumers. The PDD shows an overview of constructing a sustainability report according to the
GRI reporting guidelines.

Figure 11: The PDD of the GRI Standards method

12

ESEA methods

VERSION 1

3.11

ISO14001

ISO 14001:2015 sets out the criteria for an environmental management system and can be certiﬁed to ISO [2015].
Using ISO 14001:2015 can provide assurance to company management and employees as well as external stakeholders
that environmental impact is being measured and improved.

Figure 12: The PDD of the ISO14001 method

13

ESEA methods

VERSION 1

3.12

ISO26000

ISO 26000:2010 is intended to provide organisations with guidance concerning social responsibility and can be used as
part of public policy activities Moratis and Cochius [2017]. ISO 26000:2010 is not a management system standard. It is
not intended or appropriate for certiﬁcation purposes or regulatory or contractual use. As ISO 26000:2010 does not
contain requirements, any such certiﬁcation would not be a demonstration of conformity with ISO 26000:2010.

Figure 13: The PDD of the ISO26000 method

14

ESEA methods

VERSION 1

3.13 S-CORE

Sustainability – Competency, Opportunity, Reporting and Evaluation (S-CORE) is a web-based tool used to assess
where and how sustainability lies within an organisation, while also providing insight into opportunities based on
identiﬁed sustainability goals. S-CORE is not limited to a certain business type or size, and includes almost 100
practices across various sectors that span all levels and stages of sustainability implementation Hart [2016].

Figure 14: The PDD of the S-CORE method

15

ESEA methods

VERSION 1

3.14 NCP

The Natural Capital Protocol is a decision-making framework that enables organisations to identify, measure and value
their direct and indirect impacts and dependencies on natural capital Whitaker [2018]. It is focused at a business
decision-making level and helps organisations to understand the value of their dependence on ecosystem ﬂows, rather
than the value of natural capital stocks.

Figure 15: The PDD of the NCP method

16

ESEA methods

VERSION 1

3.15 Sustainable Development Goals Compass

The Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) Compass was developed to meet the uncertainty about what actions an
organisation can and should take in order to contribute to the goals, the SDG Compass is a guide that companies can use
to align their strategies with the relevant SDGs, and measure and manage their impacts Briones Alonso et al. [2021].

Figure 16: The PDD of the Sustainable Development Goals Compass method

17

ESEA methods

VERSION 1

3.16 SMETA

Sedex Members Ethical Trade Audit (SMETA) is an ethical accounting and audit method which encompasses aspects of
responsible business practice. As a multi-stakeholder initiative, SMETA was designed to minimise duplication of effort
and provide members and suppliers with an audit format they could easily share Medina Rodriguez [2016]. SMETA
reports are published in the SEDEX system, ensuring transparency and efﬁcient information sharing.

SMETA audits use the ETI Base Code, founded on the conventions of the International Labor Organization, as well as
relevant local laws. SMETA audits can be conducted against two or four auditing pillars. The two pillars mandatory for
any SMETA audit are Labor Standards and Health & Safety. The two additional pillars of a 4-pillar audit are Business
Ethics and Environment. They were introduced to further deepen the social responsibility aspect of SMETA audits.

Figure 17: The PDD of the SMETA method

18

ESEA methods

VERSION 1

3.17 STARS

The Sustainability Tracking, Assessment & Rating System (STARS) is a transparent, self-reporting framework for
colleges and universities to measure their sustainability performance Urbanski et al. [2015]. STARS is intended
to engage and recognise the full spectrum of higher education institutions, from community colleges to research
universities. It encompasses long-term sustainability goals for already high-achieving institutions, as well as entry
points of recognition for institutions that are taking ﬁrst steps toward sustainability.

Figure 18: The PDD of the STARS method

19

ESEA methods

VERSION 1

3.18 UNGC

The United Nations Global Compact is a non-binding United Nations pact to encourage businesses and ﬁrms worldwide
to adopt sustainable and socially responsible policies, and to report on their implementation Williams [2004]. The PDD
of the ESEA method that ensures that companies adhere to the UNGC principles is shown in Figure19

Figure 19: The PDD of the UNGC method

20

ESEA methods

VERSION 1

3.19 UniSAF

The University Sustainability Assessment Framework (UniSAF) is developed by rootAbility, a non-proﬁt social business
that promotes sustainability projects and initiatives in higher education. The method provides a set of indicators and
methodology that can be used to gather and analyse data on the sustainability performance of university RootAbility
[2017].

Figure 20: The PDD of the UniSAF method

21

ESEA methods

VERSION 1

3.20 XES Social Balance

The XES Social Balance is used by the Catalan Network of Solidarity Economy (XES) to assess the performance of
their members. The method has two variants: Basic Social Balance, Complete Social Balance. The complete one has
more direct indicators (questions) and indirect indicators (indicators), and it also deploys multi-respondent surveys
to several stakeholder groups (depending on the context of the organisation): workers/members, clients/suppliers,
volunteers Crusellas et al. [2019].

Figure 21: The PDD of the XES method

4 Discussion of results

The openESEA metamodel is created based on the PDDs of ESEA methods. The PDDs are compared using the method
comparison approach. This approach yields the metamodel depicted in Figure 22. An earlier version of the metamodel is
presented in España et al. [2019]. Based on the current version we have engineered an Xtext grammar. Using the Xtext
grammar method engineers can create models of ESEA methods. Such models can be interpreted by our open-source
model-driven tool, likewise called openESEA1. To test the comprehensibility and usability of the openESEA metamodel
and grammar we ran an experiment. The results of the experiment are presented in Ramautar and España [2022b].

1https://github.com/sergioespana/openESEA

22

ESEA methods

VERSION 1

Figure 22: The openESEA metamodel, further speciﬁed in Ramautar and España [2022a]

5 Conclusion

Over the course of the years our collection of ESEA method diagrams has grown rapidly. The models have helped
us better understand ESEA methods and they have laid foundations for further analysis and software design and
development. The domain analysis presented in this report has enabled several project already. We have created the
ﬁrst version of model-driven ESEA method interpreter España et al. [2019], an extension of the tool that generates
infographics automatically España et al. [2022], the investigation of ESEA method selection criteria Ramautar and
España [2022c], the engineering of the openESEA DSL Ramautar and España [2022b]. In the future we plan to publish
information on ESEA methods, as well as the PDDs in an online repository.

6 Acknowledgements

We thank all the students of Utrecht University’s Business Informatics master’s programme who modelled, validated,
or improved PDDs as part of their graduation projects. Moreover, we express our gratitude to all the ESEA method
experts who helped modelling and validating the diagrams. Without the contributions of all collaborations we would
not have been able to present such a detailed collection of ESEA method models.

23

ESEA methods

VERSION 1

References

Inge van de Weerd and Sjaak Brinkkemper. Meta-modeling for situational analysis and design methods. In Handbook
of research on modern systems analysis and design technologies and applications, pages 35–54. IGI Global, 2009.
Inge van de Weerd, Stefan de Weerd, and Sjaak Brinkkemper. Developing a reference method for game production by

method comparison. In Working Conference on Method Engineering, pages 313–327. Springer, 2007.

Vijanti Ramautar and Sergio España. The openESEA Modelling Language for Specifying Ethical, Social and Environ-
mental Accounting Methods. Technical report, January 2022a. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2205.
15279.

Sergio España, Niels Bik, and Sietse Overbeek. Model-driven engineering support for social and environmental
accounting. In 2019 13th International Conference on Research Challenges in Information Science (RCIS), pages
1–12. IEEE, 2019.

Vahid Garousi, Michael Felderer, and Mika V Mäntylä. The need for multivocal literature reviews in software engi-
neering: complementing systematic literature reviews with grey literature. In Proceedings of the 20th international
conference on evaluation and assessment in software engineering, pages 1–6, 2016.

BLab. B Impact Assessment. https://bimpactassessment.net/, 2018. Accessed: 2021-11-24.
Oliver F Williams. The UN Global Compact: The challenge and the promise. Business Ethics Quarterly, 14(4):

755–774, 2004.

AccountAbility. AA1000. https://www.accountability.org/standards/aa1000-assurance-standard/,

2020. Accessed: 2022-06-16.

CDP. https://www.cdp.net/en, 2021. Accessed: 2022-06-16.
Christian Felber, Vanessa Campos, and Joan R Sanchis. The common good balance sheet, an adequate tool to capture

non-ﬁnancials? Sustainability, 11(14):3791, 2019.

Udo Nabitz, Niek Klazinga, and Jan Walburg. The EFQM excellence model: European and Dutch experiences with the

EFQM approach in health care. International journal for quality in health care, 12(3):191–202, 2000.

Ecovadis. Ecovadis Sustainability Assessment. https://ecovadis.com/suppliers/, 2021. Accessed: 2022-06-16.
WRI Wbcsd. The greenhouse gas protocol. A corporate accounting and reporting standard, 2004.
GRI Standards. https://globalreporting.org/standards/, 2019. Accessed: 2021-11-24.
ISO 14001:2015 standard. https://www.iso.org/iso-14001-environmental-management.html, 2015. Ac-

cessed: 2021-11-24.

Lars Moratis and Timo Cochius. ISO 26000: The business guide to the new standard on social responsibility. Routledge,

2017.

Maureen Hart. Is your organization on the right path for sustainability? using s-core to evaluate sustainability efforts.

In Brown Bag Archive. Ngwa, 2016.

Samir Whitaker. The natural capital protocol. In Debating Nature’s Value, pages 25–38. Springer, 2018.
Elena Briones Alonso, Jan Van Ongevalle, Nadia Molenaers, and Saartje Vandenbroucke. Sdg compass guide: Practical

frameworks and tools to operationalise agenda 2030, 2021.

Alicia Medina Rodriguez. The application of the smeta audit protocol on the management of the csr of peruvian

companies: a case study of standardization via smeta in manufacturing companies. 2016.

Monika Urbanski et al. Measuring sustainability at universities by means of the sustainability tracking, assessment and
rating system (stars): early ﬁndings from stars data. Environment, Development and Sustainability, 17(2):209–220,
2015.

RootAbility. University sustainability assessment framework (uniSAF). http://rootability.com/greenoffices/

assessment/, 2017.

Raquel Alquézar Crusellas, Ruben Suriñach Padilla, and Xarxa d’Economia Solidaria. El balance social de la xes: 10

años midiendo el impacto de la ess en cataluña. In Conferência Genebra 2019. UNTFSSE, 2019.

Vijanti Ramautar and Sergio España. Engineering a Modelling Language for Ethical, Social and Environmental
Accounting. In Submitted to the 21st International Conference on Perspectives in Business Informatics Research,
2022b.

Sergio España, Vijanti Ramautar, Sietse Overbeek, Tijmen Derikx, et al. A domain speciﬁc language for data-centric

infographics. 2022.

24

ESEA methods

VERSION 1

Vijanti Ramautar and Sergio España. Decision-Making Criteria for Ethical, Social and Environmental Accounting

Selection. In Submitted to the 1st International Conference of the Economy for the Common Good, 2022c.

Appendix A: List of analysed ESEA method

Table 1: The list of all analysed ESEA methods

Method
AA1000AS

Release year Organisation
1999

AccountAbility

B Impact Assessment
CDP
Common Good Balance Sheet

EcoVadis
EFQM Model

FTSF Certiﬁcation
Greenhouse Gas Protocol
Data Center Assessment

GRI Standards

ISO14001

ISO26000

Natural Capital Protocol

S-CORE

2007
2016
2010

2007
1992

2010
2001
2017

2000

2004

2010

2016

2005

Sustainable Development Goals Compass

2015

SMETA

STARS

UN Global Compact

UniSAF

WFTO certiﬁcation

XES Social Balance

2017

2007

2000

2017

2013

-

B Lab
CDP
Economy for the Common Good

EcoVadis
European Foundation for Quality Manage-
ment (EFQM)
Fair Trade Software Foundation
Greenhouse Gas Protocol
Green IT Switzerland

Global Reporting Initiative

International Organization of Strandardiza-
tion
International Organization of Strandardiza-
tion
Capitals Coalition

International Society of Sustainability Pro-
fessionals
GRI, the UN Global Compact and the
World Business Council for Sustainable De-
velopment (WBCSD)
Sedex

Association for the Advancement of Sus-
tainability in Higher Education (AASHE)
United Nations

Student Organization for Sustainability In-
ternational
World Fair Trade Organization

Catalan Network of Solidarity Economy

URL
https://www.accountability.org/standards/
aa1000-assurance-standard/
https://bimpactassessment.net/
https://www.cdp.net/en/companies
https://www.ecogood.org/apply-ecg/
companies/#balance-sheet-resources
https://ecovadis.com/
https://www.efqm.org/efqm-model/

https://ftsf.eu/about-us
https://ghgprotocol.org/standards
https://greenit-switzerland.ch/app/dca/en/
dc-assessment
https://www.globalreporting.org/
how-to-use-the-gri-standards/
https://www.iso.org/
iso-14001-environmental-management.html
https://www.iso.org/
iso-26000-social-responsibility.html
https://capitalscoalition.org/
capitals-approach/natural-capital-protocol/
?fwp_filter_tabs=training_material
https://sustainablemeasures.com/

https://sdgcompass.org/download-guide/

https://www.sedex.com/our-services/
smeta-audit/
stars.aashe.org

https://www.unglobalcompact.org/what-is-gc/
mission/principles
https://www.greenofficemovement.org/
sustainability-assessment/
https://wfto.com/what-we-do#
our-guarantee-system
https://xes.cat/

25

