International Journal of Social  
Science Research and Review 

http://ijssrr.com 
editor@ijssrr.com 
Volume 5, Issue 7 
July, 2022 
Pages: 127-134 

Knowledge Enhancement and Mobile Technology: Improving Effectiveness and 
Efficiency 

Siddhartha Paul Tiwari 

Google Asia Pacific, Maple Tree Business City, Singapore 

Email: sidpaultiwari@gmail.com 

  http://dx.doi.org/10.47814/ijssrr.v5i7.338        

Abstract  

In  education,  mobile  technology  creates  value  on  three  fundamental  pillars:  productivity, 
coordination, and transformation. Mobile apps are becoming an increasingly important aspect of teaching 
and  learning  in  many  countries. The  use  of  mobile  applications  in  education  is not  only  beneficial,  but 
also provides students with an enjoyable and interactive experience. For a mobile product launch to be as 
successful as it can be, it is imperative that a systematic, precise, controlled, and well-established process 
is  in  place,  which  is  controlled,  efficient,  and  well-established.  Many  educational  organizations  find 
themselves in situations where they have to get all departments working effectively and together in order 
to  meet  a  specific  deadline,  including  marketing,  production,  and  operations,  after  the  organization's 
product clearance board approves the new product. In many ways, the situation is similar to the software 
crisis  that  took  place  in  the  middle  of  the  1970's.  As  a  result  of  globalization  and  communication, 
oftentimes the effects of globalization are amplified because of the vast amount of information that must 
be  shared among  project team  members.  Every  educational  organization has  a unique  style and  way  of 
doing things, and the project management team is no exception. As a consequence, it is commonplace to 
see  that  every  education  entity  has  its  own  particular  style  and  way  of  doing  things.  In  regards  to  the 
creation of a mobile application that is going to function efficiently, it is important to remember that it is 
extremely  important  to  stick  to  the  strategies  and  requirements  that  will  yield  the  best  results  for  the 
education sector. 

Keywords:  Education Development; Education and Mobile Apps; Mobile Technologies and Education; 
Education and Apps 

Introduction 

Although  much  progress  has  been  made  in  the  technology  sector  in  the  past  decade,  most 
educational organizations are still heavily focused on managing legacy mobile applications and systems 
and  reducing  costs.  Therefore,  decision  makers  are  unable  to  pursue  the  more  strategic  objective  of 

Knowledge Enhancement and Mobile Technology: Improving Effectiveness and Efficiency 

127 

 
 
 
 
                                                        
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Social  
Science Research and Review 

Volume 5, Issue 7
July, 2022

creating  greater  value  through  the  use  of  analytics,  systems,  and  applications  on  mobile  devices.  By 
focusing  on the efficiency  and  alignment  of operations,  decision  makers  can  begin  to  drive  innovation, 
which  is  the  key  to  unlocking  the  full  potential  of  mobile  technologies  in  the  education  sector. 
Furthermore,  Mehdipour,  Y.,  &  Zerehkafi,  H.  (2013)  identified  the  benefits  and  challenges  of  mobile 
learning  for  the  education  sector.  The  goal  of  this  viewpoint  is  to  consider  the  value  creation  journey, 
emphasizing  particularly  the  factors  that  are  needed  to  unlock  the  potential  of  mobile  applications  and 
systems. 

In the last few years, Covid has been the cause of a worsened economic environment. Educational 
organizations have been forced to launch cautious products as a result of rising costs and unpredictable 
markets. It has therefore become increasingly difficult for instructors and overall education sector to meet 
their  expectations.  During  the  process  of  launching  new  products,  educational  organizations  can  track 
progress by using time-tracking software and scheduling tools, ensuring the deadlines are not missed. In 
spite of the project monitoring tools, the launch dates of the mobile products have not been met despite 
the use of these tools. In light of the unprecedented challenges faced by mobile products launched as a 
result of Covid, certain points have emerged, including the urgency at the forefront of launching a new 
product. Mobile product development has to be undertaken at a rapid pace in order to meet the demands 
of  a  dynamic  competitive  environment.  There  has  been  demand  on  product  teams  to  deliver  mobile 
technologies  and  apps  that  could  be  developed,  tested,  and  shipped  within  a  short  period  of  time.  Test 
methods that have been used traditionally are known to be slow and might not keep pace with the fast-
paced new world order we are entering. 

How Mobile Technology Creates Value for Education Sector 

The  three  fundamental  pillars  on  which  mobile  technology  in  education  creates  value  are 
productivity, coordination, and transformation. Additionally, Vázquez-Cano, E. (2014) provides detailed 
information regarding mobile distance learning in higher education using smartphones and apps. In many 
countries, mobile apps are becoming an increasingly important part of education. The use of mobile apps 
in  education  is  not  only  beneficial,  but  also  provides  students  with  an  enjoyable  and  interactive 
experience.  Various  educational  mobile  apps  are  designed  specifically  to  target  the  psychology  of 
students  in  order  to  assist  students  in  understanding  and  assimilating  the  information  from  a  different 
perspective. The app facilitates students' understanding of concepts by presenting them with challenging 
tasks, puzzles, and educational games. Khan Academy and Duolingo are just some of the most popular 
educational  mobile  apps  available  today.  It  is  possible  for  people  without  access  to  education  to  learn 
some skills by utilizing mobile applications for educational institutions, even if they don't have access to 
education.  Learning  will  no  longer  be  restricted  to  the  classroom  with  the  use  of  educational  apps,  as 
students  will  have  the  power  to  take  control  of  their  own  learning  at  any  time  and  can  challenge 
themselves. By mastering the concepts they are learning in the classroom through learning apps, students 
have the chance to benefit greatly from their studies.  It is important to note that the use of educational 
applications is not only restricted to creative learning; they can also be used for accommodating students 
according to their convenience, since it can be quite exhausting for both students and teachers to deliver a 
lengthy  lecture.  These  days,  educational  apps  for  mobile  phones  and  e-books  are  the  first  choice  for 
students who want to learn on their own schedule because they offer students the possibility of learning 
on the go. By engaging students in a more engaging and enjoyable way, this new approach to education 
facilitated  by  the  use  of  mobile  apps  is  helping  students  to  learn  in  a  more  enjoyable  and  effective 
manner. 

Common Roadblocks to Using Mobile Technology in Education Sector 

Despite  its  interesting  features,  mobile  technology  has  been  slow  to  catch  on  in  the  education 

sector due to a number of factors:  

Knowledge Enhancement and Mobile Technology: Improving Effectiveness and Efficiency 

128 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Social  
Science Research and Review 

Volume 5, Issue 7
July, 2022

1.  There  appears  to  be  an  overemphasis  on  retroactively  applying  technology  to  problems  and  a 

reluctance to adjust where improvements are needed.  

2.  There  is  a  persistent  problem  in  the  innovation  process  that  stays  in  the  proof-of-concept  stage 

without progressing to scaling.  

3.  It  seems  that  the  inability  to  recognize  new  opportunities  in  mobile  applications  as  well  as  the 

inability to update new content regularly is preventing student interest from growing. 

Overcoming Roadblocks to Mobile Technology Adoption in Education Sector 

Building a Mobile Strategy Based on Innovation Funnel 

In  order  to  achieve  the  goal  of  successful  usage  of  mobile  technology,  it  is  important  to  first 
develop  a  mobile  technology  strategy  that  specifies  clear  goals  and  end  states  based  on  a  roadmap 
indicating short- and medium-term objectives, along with what mobile technologies need to be employed 
to achieve them. Taking advantage of the heat map described above, the target end states should define 
technology and application objectives, and specify how a wide range of mobile learning building blocks 
can  be  applied  to  operational  processes.  It  is  important  to  examine  the  financial  implications  of  the 
various aspects of mobile applications. In a large educational institution, a balanced portfolio of mobile 
projects  can  be  developed.  There  are  a  number  of  parameters  to  consider.  These  include  value  versus 
feasibility, risk versus reward, scale of investment and so on. Mobile technology can be used to assist in 
this process, but it should be carefully chosen as a use case in order to achieve the maximum benefit. The 
development of an innovation funnel is necessary, which entails phases such as finding technologies and 
ideas  to  be  integrated  into  mobile  platforms,  evaluating  and  developing  them,  and  scaling  them  to 
integrate  with  offline  sources  in  the  future.  Every  effective  innovation  process  relies  on  an  open 
ecosystem  approach,  which  means  that  external  partners  and  users  are  involved  in  each  stage  of  the 
process, such that students are an important part of the process. 

Scaling and Integrating 

Monitoring and evaluating the development of mobile technologies requires an effective scouting 
capability that can be implemented in real time. Mobile technology should be prioritized in line with the 
educational  strategy  and  the  portfolio  of  educational  projects.  It  should  not  be  merely  a  rigidly  "top-
down"  exercise,  but  a  "bottom-up"  exercise  that  involves  the  end  users  like  students  in  order  to  take 
advantage  of  new  mobile  opportunities  that  are  emerging  rapidly  nowadays,  which  may  not  have  been 
apparent during the process of setting the strategy. 

Assembling a Plan 

In order to move from one process stage to another, the action should be complete and explicit. 
The  project  manager  should  follow  a  transition  in  order  to  prevent  a  loss  of  product  launch  during 
subsequent  activities.  It  is  possible  to  accomplish  focused  transitions  by  reserving  particular 
communication channels only to be used for transitions from one stage to the next. Interim goals are also 
important  when  making  the  transition  from  one  stage  to  the  next.  The  fundamental  pillars  for  mobile 
technology to create value are productivity, coordination, and transformation. Without these three pillars, 
mobile technology is not going to do its job. In order to achieve the goal of successful mobile technology 
usage,  and  as  a  first  step  you  should  set  up  a  mobile  technology  strategy  that  defines  clear  goals  and 
determines  what  mobile  technologies  should  be  associated  with  achieving  those  goals.  The  roadmap 
should  specify  both  short-term  and  medium-term  goals,  along  with  what  mobile  technologies  will  be 
utilized  for  achieving  the  goals.  The  heat  map  described  earlier  should  help  the  target  end  states  to 
identify  the  technology  and  the  technology  implementation  objectives,  as  well  as  how  a  wide  range  of 

Knowledge Enhancement and Mobile Technology: Improving Effectiveness and Efficiency 

129 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Social  
Science Research and Review 

Volume 5, Issue 7
July, 2022

mobile learning building blocks can be utilized to support operation processes as defined by the target end 
states.  There  is  a  need  to  assess  the  financial  implications  of  mobile  applications  in  order  to  provide  a 
thorough financial analysis of mobile applications. 

A Global and Local Approach 

When a mobile product is built to meet the needs of a big client with huge monetary value, when 
that product is introduced to a local market there tends to be a big mismatch between what engineering 
decided to build and what the sales team promised (or at least wanted to promise) to the client. It is very 
important to manage the expectations correctly in order to achieve the best results. Getting the ability to 
run remote product tests that validate functionality is a requirement for globally distributed local teams 
with different cultural and linguistic backgrounds. A failure to do so would result in the experience for 
local users being quite different from what they previously experienced. These challenges resulting from 
globalization would require functional local product test teams to meet a whole new set of requirements. 

Improve the Efficiency of Processes 

The solution to strengthening Product Launches consists of examining the current processes and 
to  modify  them  so  that  new  product  launches  become  less  painful  to  execute.  Additionally, 
implementation of the proposed strategies and best practices will provide focus on the entire new product 
launch,  from  development  to  production.  The  following  are  five  proposed  practices  used  to  strengthen 
product launches for Improving efficiencies from development to production.  

A real time scouting capability that can be implemented in real time is essential to monitoring and 
evaluating the development of mobile technologies. It is important that mobile technology is prioritized 
according  to  the  organizational  strategy  and  the  portfolio  of  projects  in  the  educational  organisation. 
Developing  a  mobile  strategy  should  not  merely  be  a  top-down  exercise,  but  a bottom-up  exercise that 
involves the end users, such as students, in order to take full advantage of the new mobile opportunities 
that  are  coming  up  rapidly,  which  may  not  have  been  apparent  during  the  process  of  setting  up  the 
strategy. 

Improved Project Agility  

As a rule of thumb, we should keep in mind that agility is nothing more than keeping the project 
open, flexible, and flexible from the start. It is for this reason that any project which deals with the launch 
of a mobile product needs to be flexible and that the project manager be capable of applying both a top-
down  and  bottom-up  approach  to  the  process  of  planning  a  mobile  product,  the  latter  of  which  should 
correspond to the needs of the end users. The flexibility of the project will allow us to implement the new 
standards and methodologies at different points during the development of the new mobile products in a 
way that suits the new requirements of the project. 

In order for mobile technologies to fulfill their full potential, decision makers need to focus on the 
efficiency and alignment of education operations. By doing so, they can begin to drive innovation, which 
is the key to unlocking the full potential of mobile applications. This viewpoint seeks to give the reader an 
understanding of the value creation process, emphasizing specifically the factors that are required in order 
to unlock the potential of mobile applications and systems when applied in synchrony with project agility. 

Making Decisions Based on Information 

With access to the right and high end information the project manager should make sure to refer it 
to  subject  matter  experts  who  can  help  an  organization  correctly  interpret  and  implement  it.  A  strong 
grasp  can  be  made  as  to  how  the  operating  landscape  for  a  new  product  launch  is  standing.  The 

Knowledge Enhancement and Mobile Technology: Improving Effectiveness and Efficiency 

130 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Social  
Science Research and Review 

Volume 5, Issue 7
July, 2022

information  also  helps  in  how  the  project  manager  can  intelligently  move  forward  for  successfully 
launching  a  product.  Most  educational  organizations  are  essentially  deterministic  in  their  approach  to 
making  decisions,  relying  disproportionately  on  structured  numeric  data,  taken  from  within  the 
educational organization, and evaluating progress against deterministic outcomes. 

By combining and aggregating internal and external sources of data, it is often possible to gain 
new  insights,  intelligence,  and  information  that  provides  a  high  return  on  investment.  As  a  result,  new 
data  ecosystems  may  emerge,  providing  novel  value-added  services  based  on  the  data.  The  advent  of 
mobile  technologies  may  present  opportunities  for  monetization  of  assets  and  services  related  to  them. 
There may be opportunities to sell excess capacity, data, or cloud capabilities to third parties who may 
find them useful. As an example, within the rail industry, the commercialization of excess broadband and 
fiber capacity has a fairly widespread practice. 

Improving the Accuracy and Timeliness of Reporting 

There is no doubt that in today's evolving mobile landscape, performance, competitiveness, and 
sustainability  are  heavily  correlated  to  the  ability  to  deliver  reliable  results  quickly  and  in  a  timely 
manner.  

As  a  result  of  the  launch  of  a  new  mobile  product,  one  of  the  biggest  fears  that  needs  to  be 
addressed is the possibility that stale reports will appear together with inaccurate statistics as to where the 
project stands when it comes to launch. It is necessary for the project manager to make regular visits to 
the development team and the routine data quality assessments must be reviewed in order to make sure 
that the reported data is accurate and in line with the project scope.  

Production personnel have to make sure that they are well prepared to provide on-site coaching to 
project staff and project partners regarding data collection, accuracy and analysis in order for the action 
plans to be implemented in accordance with the overall vision of the project. 

Managing Constant Change and Integrating 

It is common for teams to be dispersed geographically and to work concurrently on m-commerce 
product launches and development processes as a result of m-commerce. Therefore, it is inevitable that 
software will be released at different cadences, schedules, and times. As a project manager, you may be 
required to get code from  one team and then  you  may need to test the code, merge it with the code of 
another  team,  and  then  integrate  the  work  of  two  or  more  teams.  This  process  adds  up  to  the  fact  that 
when  these  things  are  done  regularly,  the  process  of merging  code  has  become  almost  a  daily  activity. 
Because of the sheer number of steps involved, this process of merging is a time-consuming one and often 
leads  to  the  entire  project  coming  to  a  halt  as  a  result  of  the  considerable  amount  of  time  and  effort 
required.  To  become  able  to  integrate  all  the  steps  involved  with  the  developmental  process  in  an 
effective way, the project manager needs a team of people who work hard and dedicate themselves to the 
project. 

Despite the fact that project management is all about collaborative teamwork. The success of a 
new m-commerce product launch is directly influenced by the successful integration of individual efforts, 
each  with  a  different  background.  A  typical  example  of  how  to  accomplish  this  would  be  mobile 
development at a small scale educational organization, which is a great example of how to assign varying 
levels of information access to project participants. 

Knowledge Enhancement and Mobile Technology: Improving Effectiveness and Efficiency 

131 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Social  
Science Research and Review 

Volume 5, Issue 7
July, 2022

Stages Leading Up to the Launch and Building Market Excitement 

The preparation process itself is one of the most exciting aspects of preparing to release a newly 
developed mobile app product. There are many factors that contribute to brand success and it is not just as 
simple  as  choosing  the  right  name  for  the  product  and  preparing  it  for  success.  In  fact,  most  of  these 
phases are just the beginning stages of the entire process. For professionals associated with the education 
sector, it is essential to remember that regardless of how fantastic a new app or education concept may be, 
it will still need to be sold. Without people knowing about the idea or concept, it will never be able to 
succeed. That no matter how good the idea is, it will never be able to sell. It is very important to run an 
enthralling campaign to raise curiosity about your app to make it a success. Even before the mobile app 
has  been  released,  there  may  be  a  possibility  that  its  reputation  could  be  damaged  if  its  social  media 
presence is insufficient before the launch of the mobile app. The chances are high that your brand-new 
product  will  be  put  under  the  microscope  by  the  internet  following  its  launch.  Consumers,  industry 
experts, and other individuals including students regularly write about your mobile app and publish them 
to the public. That is why it is important for your app to have more public reviews about your products. 
Before a new mobile app is released on the market, a large number of ratings and reviews can be found on 
the Internet that have a profound impact on how it will be perceived by the public. 

Conclusion  

One  of  the  most  promising  ways  to  deal  with  the  present  economic  crisis  is  to  develop  a 
structured, strategic approach to mobile value creation. With the help of this study, organizations will be 
able to break free of the vicious circle of escalating operating costs and a lack of investment in improving 
mobile launches. The goal of mobile technology and apps must be to complement, rather than to replace, 
human efforts in order to enable students to make better and more informed decisions with greater speed 
and  confidence,  resulting  in  increased  learning  outcomes.  By  using  mobile  technology,  many  of  the 
concerns in regard to its adoption are also eliminated. 

In  the  context  of  an  educational  institution,  taking  a  structured,  strategic  approach  to  creating 
value from mobile devices has great potential. It allows organizations to break out of the vicious circle of 
rising  operating  costs  and  a  lack  of  investment  in  improving  student  engagement.  As  a  starting  point, 
mobile  technology  and  apps  should  complement,  rather  than  replace,  human  teaching.  In  this  way, 
instructors  and  students  can  make  better,  more  informed  decisions  with  greater  speed  and  confidence, 
resulting in greater learning. Using mobile technology within an educational setting also eliminates many 
of the concerns related to its adoption. 

The  future  products  which  an  educational  sector  needs  to  launch  must  develop  the  ability  to 
anticipate and address customer requirements proactively, and eliminate problems preemptively wherever 
possible. The above listed strategies will help organizations in improving efficiencies from development 
to  production  for  new  m-commerce  products.  Reaching  a  level  of  efficiency  is  a  constant  evolutionary 
process  that  achieves  total  transformation  founded  on  smarter  data,  smarter  processes  and  smarter 
technologies.  Integrating  these  three  critical  elements  intelligently  enables  an  organization  to  leverage 
innovative product launch processes, which in turn allows for the use of detailed data and technology to 
understand current performance and how to achieve educational goals. 

References 

Anderson, P., & Blackwood, A. (2004). Mobile and PDA technologies and their future use in education. 

JISC Technology and Standards Watch, 4(3), 3-33. 

Knowledge Enhancement and Mobile Technology: Improving Effectiveness and Efficiency 

132 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Social  
Science Research and Review 

Volume 5, Issue 7
July, 2022

Ally, M., & Prieto-Blázquez, J. (2014). What is the future of mobile learning in education? International 

Journal of Educational Technology in Higher Education, 11(1), 142-151. 

Baisya,  R.  K.,  &  Tiwari,  S.  P.  (2008).  E-governance  Challenges  and  Strategies  for  Better-managed 

Projects. Emerging Technologies in E-Government, 203-208. 

Baran, E. (2014). A review of research on mobile learning in teacher education. Journal of Educational 

Technology & Society, 17(4), 17-32. 

Briz-Ponce,  L.,  &  García-Peñalvo,  F.  J.  (2015).  An  empirical  assessment  of  a  technology  acceptance 

model for apps in medical education. Journal of medical systems, 39(11), 1-5. 

Chang, C. Y., Lai, C. L., & Hwang, G. J. (2018). Trends and research issues of mobile learning studies in 
nursing education: A review of academic publications from 1971 to 2016. Computers & Education, 
116, 28-48. 

Chen,  B.,  &  Denoyelles,  A.  (2013).  Exploring  students’  mobile  learning  practices  in  higher  education. 

Educause Review, 7(1), 36-43. 

El-Hussein,  M.  O.  M.,  &  Cronje,  J.  C.  (2010).  Defining  mobile  learning  in  the  higher  education 

landscape. Journal of Educational Technology & Society, 13(3), 12-21. 

Hingle, M., & Patrick, H. (2016). There are thousands of apps for that: navigating mobile technology for 

nutrition education and behavior. Journal of nutrition education and behavior, 48(3), 213-218. 

Hoppe,  H.,  Joiner,  R.,  Milrad,  M.,  &  Sharples,  M.  (2003).  Guest  editorial:  Wireless  and  mobile 

technologies in education. Journal of computer assisted Learning, 19(3), 255-259. 

Keengwe,  J.,  &  Bhargava,  M.  (2014).  Mobile  learning  and  integration  of  mobile  technologies  in 

education. Education and Information Technologies, 19(4), 737-746. 

Lehner, F., & Nosekabel, H. (2002, August). The role of mobile devices in E-Learning first experiences 
with a wireless E-Learning environment. In Proceedings. IEEE International Workshop on Wireless 
and Mobile Technologies in Education (pp. 103-106). IEEE. 

Mehdipour,  Y.,  &  Zerehkafi,  H.  (2013).  Mobile  learning  for  education:  Benefits  and  challenges. 

International Journal of Computational Engineering Research, 3(6), 93-101. 

O'connor,  S.,  &  Andrews,  T.  (2018).  Smartphones  and  mobile  applications  (apps)  in  clinical  nursing 

education: A student perspective. Nurse education today, 69, 172-178. 

Page, T. (2014). Application-based mobile devices in design education. International Journal of Mobile 

Learning and Organisation, 8(2), 96-111. 

Quinn, C. N. (2011). The mobile academy: mLearning for higher education. John Wiley & Sons. 

Thornton,  P.,  &  Houser,  C.  (2004,  March).  Using  mobile  phones  in  education.  In  The  2nd  IEEE 
International Workshop on Wireless and Mobile Technologies in Education, 2004. Proceedings. (pp. 
3-10). IEEE. 

Thornton,  P.,  &  Houser,  C.  (2005).  Using  mobile  phones  in  English  education  in  Japan.  Journal  of 

computer assisted learning, 21(3), 217-228. 

Knowledge Enhancement and Mobile Technology: Improving Effectiveness and Efficiency 

133 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Social  
Science Research and Review 

Volume 5, Issue 7
July, 2022

Tiwari, S. P. (2022). Emerging Technologies: Factors Influencing Knowledge Sharing. World Journal of 

Educational Research. 

Tiwari,  S.  P.  (2022).  Information  and  communication  technology  initiatives  for  knowledge  sharing  in 

agriculture. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.08649. 

Tiwari, S. P. (2022). Re-emergence of Asia in the New Industrial Era. Technium Soc. Sci. J., 29, 471. 

Tiwari,  S.  P.  (2022).  Organizational  Competitiveness  and  Digital  Governance  Challenges.  Archives  of 

Business Research, 10(3). 

Tiwari, S. P. (2022). Knowledge Management Strategies and Emerging Technologies--An  Overview of 

the Underpinning Concepts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01100. 

Tiwari,  S.  P.  (2022).  Covid-19:  Knowledge  Development,  Exchange,  and  Emerging  Technologies. 

International Journal of Social Science Research and Review, 5(5), 310-314. 

Tiwari,  S.  P.  (2015).  Strengthening  E-Commerce  Product  Launches-Improving  Efficiencies  from 
Development  to  Production.  Project  and  Technology  Management  Foundation  (A  Non-Profit 
Organization) Member of Asia Pacific Federation of Project Management, 1(2), 4-6. 

Vázquez-Cano,  E.  (2014).  Mobile  distance  learning  with  smartphones  and  apps  in  higher  education. 

Educational Sciences: Theory and Practice, 14(4), 1505-1520. 

Wallace, S., Clark, M., & White, J. (2012). ‘It's on my iPhone’: attitudes to the use of mobile computing 

devices in medical education, a mixed-methods study. BMJ open, 2(4), e001099. 

Yordanova, K. (2007, June). Mobile learning and integration of advanced technologies in education. In 
Proceedings of the 2007 international conference on Computer systems and technologies (pp. 1-6). 

Copyrights 

Copyright for this article is retained by the author(s), with first publication rights granted to the journal. 

This  is  an  open-access  article  distributed  under  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  Creative  Commons 
Attribution license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). 

Knowledge Enhancement and Mobile Technology: Improving Effectiveness and Efficiency 

134 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
