2
2
0
2

g
u
A
1
3

]
h
p
-
p
m
o
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
7
9
0
0
0
.
9
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Iterative Calculation of Characteristic Modes Using
Arbitrary Full-wave Solvers

Johan Lundgren, Member, IEEE, Kurt Schab, Member, IEEE, Miloslav Capek, Senior Member, IEEE,

Mats Gustafsson, Senior Member, IEEE, and Lukas Jelinek

1

Abstract—An iterative algorithm is adopted to construct ap-
proximate representations of matrices describing the scattering
properties of arbitrary objects. The method is based on the
implicit evaluation of scattering responses from iteratively gener-
ated excitations. The method does not require explicit knowledge
of any system matrices (e.g., stiffness or impedance matrices)
and is well-suited for use with matrix-free and iterative full-
wave solvers, such as FDTD, FEM, and MLFMA. The proposed
method allows for signiﬁcant speed-up compared to the direct
construction of a full transition matrix or scattering dyadic. The
method is applied to the characteristic mode decomposition of
arbitrarily shaped obstacles of arbitrary material distribution.
Examples demonstrating the speed-up and complexity of the
algorithm are studied with several commercial software packages.

Index Terms—Antenna theory, eigenvalues and eigenfunctions,
computational electromagnetics, characteristic modes, scattering.

ﬁnal transition matrix or matrix representation of the scattering
dyadic.

In this work, we consider an iterative algorithm for efﬁ-
ciently estimating the complete transition matrix or scattering
dyadic of arbitrary scatterers. This method yields characteristic
modes without explicit knowledge of any matrices used within
a particular numerical method. The proposed technique repre-
sents a matrix-free method for computing characteristic modes
in an arbitrary full-wave solver. Additionally, the algorithm
readily allows for calculating all characteristic modes with
modal signiﬁcance above a predeﬁned threshold, which may
be favorable over algorithms producing a ﬁxed number of
modes in decreasing order of modal signiﬁcance.

I. INTRODUCTION

C HARACTERISTIC mode analysis centers on the decom-

position of the scattering properties of arbitrary structures
into a basis with convenient properties, see [1]–[5] for a de-
tailed review. While characteristic mode analysis is commonly
associated with the study of perfectly conducting objects using
the method of moments [6], characteristic modes of arbitrary
structures can be calculated using any full-wave solver using
scattering-based formulations [7]–[9]. This approach involves
only the forward solution of a series of scattering problems
to construct matrices that describe the scattering properties of
the system under study.

An object’s transition matrix [10, §7.8] or its scattering
dyadic [10, §7.8.1] can be constructed using a series of
simulations carried out by any full-wave solver capable of
determining scattered ﬁelds due to a known excitation. A
simple approach to this procedure (discussed in [7] and [9]),
involves a number of full-wave solutions coinciding with the
selected dimension of the transition matrix or scattering dyadic
representation. For large problems necessitating matrix-free
methods (e.g., iterative FEM solvers, FMM, and FDTD), [11,
Ch. 11], the cost of performing each of these full-wave simu-
lations is typically far higher than the cost of decomposing the

Manuscript received September 2, 2022; revised September 2, 2022.
supported by the Czech Science Foundation under

This work was
project No. 21-19025M and the Swedish Research Council (2017-04656).

J. Lundgren and M. Gustafsson are with Lund University, Lund, Sweden,

(e-mails: {johan.lundgren, mats.gustafsson}@eit.lth.se).

K. Schab is with Santa Clara University, Santa Clara, USA (e-mail:

kschab@scu.edu).

M. Capek and L. Jelinek are with Czech Technical University in Prague,

Czech Republic (e-mails: {miloslav.capek,lukas.jelinek}@fel.cvut.cz).

II. TRANSITION MATRIX AND SCATTERING DYADIC

Consider an obstacle Ω illuminated by an incident ﬁeld Ei
and producing a scattered ﬁeld Es. The transformation be-
tween incident and scattered ﬁelds can be described by ma-
trices by projecting both onto wave-speciﬁc bases. Utilizing
regular (Bessel) and outgoing (Hankel) spherical vector waves
to represent the incident and scattered ﬁeld, the scattering
problem is completely deﬁned by the transition matrix T [10]

Ta = f ,

(1)

where a and f are collections of spherical vector wave
expansion coefﬁcients for the incident and scattered ﬁeld,
respectively. Alternatively, if the incident ﬁeld is described by
a spectrum of plane waves
(cid:90)

Ei(r) =

E(ˆr(cid:48))e−jkˆr(cid:48)·r dΩ(cid:48)

(2)

4π

and the scattered ﬁeld is studied in terms of the far-ﬁeld F
deﬁned as

F (ˆr) = lim
r→∞

Es(r)rejkr,

(3)

then the scattering problem is completely described by the
scattering dyadic S as [10]

4πj
k

(cid:90)

4π

S(ˆr, ˆr(cid:48)) · E(ˆr(cid:48)) dΩ(cid:48) = F (ˆr).

(4)

Here k is the background wave number, j2 = −1, ˆr = r/r,
and r = |r|. Applying a quadrature rule to approximate the
above integral transforms the scattering dyadic description of
the problem into matrix form, see [9].

 
 
 
 
 
 
III. SCATTERING-BASED CHARACTERISTIC MODE
DECOMPOSITION
Characteristic modes are ﬁelds or currents excited by char-
acteristic excitations which are solutions to an eigenvalue
problem involving either the transition matrix or scattering
dyadic [7], [9]. In the case when spherical vector waves
are used, characteristic excitations are given by expansion
coefﬁcient vectors an satisfying [7]

Tan = tnan,

(5)

while in the case of a plane-wave basis, characteristic excita-
tions are the plane-wave spectra En computed from [9]

2

Algorithm 1 Estimation of the transition matrix

1: m = 0

2: a0 ← rand

3: while stopping criteria are not met do

4:

5:

6:

7:

8:

9:

am ← am/|am|

fm ← L(am)
Tm ← (cid:80)
p≤m fpaH
p
{tn}m ← eig(Tm)
Pm ← (cid:80)
p≤m apaH
p
am+1 ← fm − Pmfm

(cid:90)

4π

S(ˆr, ˆr(cid:48)) · En(ˆr(cid:48)) dΩ(cid:48) = tnEn(ˆr).

(6)

10:

m ← m + 1

Note that, by the deﬁnitions of the transition matrix (1)
and scattering dyadic (4), the eigenvectors of either of the
above eigenvalue problems are simultaneously representations
of both incident and scattered ﬁelds, i.e., both instances of
an may be replaced by fn in (5) and both instances of En
may be replaced by F n in (6). Additionally, the characteristic
excitations an or En may be applied to reconstruct modal
current densities and other modal quantities [8], [9]. The
scattering-based characteristic mode problem in (6) is equiva-
lent to impedance-based problem for lossless structures, with
explicit algebraic links between the two approaches available
for many common integral equation formulations [7]. Charac-
teristic mode eigenvalues of impedance-based formulations,
commonly denoted as λn [2], are related to those of the
scattering-based formulation via [7]

11: end while

Algorithm 2 Estimation of the scattering dyadic

1: m = 0

2: E0(ˆr) ← rand

3: while stopping criteria are not met do

4:

5:

6:

7:

8:

9:

10:

(cid:113)(cid:82) |Em(ˆr)|2 dΩ

p≤m F p(ˆr)E∗

Em ← Em/
F m(ˆr) ← L(Em(ˆr(cid:48)))
Sm(ˆr, ˆr(cid:48)) ← (cid:80)
{tn}m ← eig(Sm)
P m(ˆr, ˆr(cid:48)) ← (cid:80)
Em+1 ← F m − (cid:82) P m(ˆr, ˆr(cid:48)) · F m(ˆr(cid:48)) dΩ(cid:48)
m ← m + 1

p≤m Ep(ˆr)E∗

p(ˆr(cid:48))

p(ˆr(cid:48))

tn = −

1
1 + jλn

.

(7)

11: end while

IV. CONSTRUCTION OF SCATTERING OPERATORS
The transition matrix T and scattering dyadic S are not, in
general, known in closed form for arbitrary scattering systems.
However, construction of either quantity (or its discrete repre-
sentation in the case of the scattering dyadic) can be carried
out with full-wave simulations capable of mapping arbitrary
incident ﬁelds onto the resulting scattered ﬁelds. The number
of incident ﬁeld conﬁgurations (i.e., spherical or plane waves)
required to construct accurate representations of T or S is
commonly dictated by the electrical size of an obstacle [7],
[9] and varies from tens to thousands. However, the resulting
matrices are often of low rank and their explicit calculation
could be circumvented by a matrix completion technique [12],
such as the one introduced in the following section,
that
constructs approximate representations of T or S with a low
number of calls to a full-wave solver.

Throughout this letter, we schematically denote the process
of calling a full-wave solver as L(Ei) = Es, where the
input (excitation) ﬁeld Ei and output (scattered) ﬁeld Es are
assumed to be expressed in bases appropriate for constructing
the operator of interest. For example, a solver assembling an
incident ﬁeld out of spherical waves with weights contained in
the vector a and returning a scattered ﬁeld expressed in terms
of spherical wave weights f may be written schematically as

L(a) = f even if the underlying transition matrix (1) is not
explicitly computed during the simulation process. A similar
notation is adopted for constructing incident ﬁelds with plane-
wave weights E(ˆr(cid:48)) and calculating the resulting scattered
far-ﬁelds F (ˆr).

V. ITERATIVE ALGORITHMS

Procedures for estimating the transition or scattering dyadic
matrix of an object using a set of full-wave evaluations are
sketched in Algorithms 1 and 2, respectively. Both algorithms
follow similar steps, though the implementation details differ
in a few small, yet signiﬁcant, ways. These differences are
highlighted in the following description of the procedure,
where steps of both algorithms are referenced in parallel.

In the setup steps 1 and 2, an iteration index m is initialized
to zero while an excitation vector is initialized with random
the vector a0
values. For the transition matrix algorithm,
is initialized with random complex numbers while in the
scattering dyadic algorithm the excitation E0 is a random
complex function.

Step 3 represents a condition for terminating the iterating
component of the algorithm. Options for this condition are
discussed further at the end of this section. Within the iterating

loop, excitations are normalized in step 4 using either a
vector norm (transition matrix algorithm) or an inner product
deﬁned over the unit sphere (scattering dyadic algorithm).
The normalized excitation is then used to drive a full-wave
simulation in step 5.

In step 6,

the transition matrix or scattering dyadic is
estimated by a set of outer products between all previous
excitations and scattered ﬁelds. This construction ensures that
incident ﬁelds map to the observed scattered ﬁelds when the
incident ﬁelds are orthogonal in an appropriate inner product.
The estimate of the scattering dyadic or transition matrix is
then used to generate an estimate of the set of eigenvalues
{tn}m in step 7 using the appropriate choice of eigenvalue
problem in (5) or (6).

In steps 8 and 9, the Gram-Schmidt procedure [13] is used
to generate a new excitation based on the previous scattered
ﬁeld with zero projection onto the set of previous excitations.
The index m is then incremented and the procedure repeats
from step 4 until one or more stopping criteria are met.

A. Implementation Considerations

Note that the classical Gram-Schmidt procedure described
in step 8 is unstable and the excitations lose orthogonality
after a few iterations. The modiﬁed Gram-Schmidt procedure
stabilizes the procedure [13] and should be used in 8. This
modiﬁcation also highlights the similarity with Arnoldi it-
eration [13], but is for conceptual simplicity not described
in Algorithms 1 and 2. Additionally,
the algorithms may
be re-initialized with a random excitation in the orthogonal
complement to Pm or P m to improve robustness.

An example of a stopping criterion is detecting an updated
excitation norm less than a predeﬁned value. Alternatively,
the routine may be terminated when all modes with modal
signiﬁcance above a certain threshold tthr are sufﬁciently
converged, that is,

(cid:26) |˜tn,m − ˜tn,m−1|
|˜tn,m|

(cid:27)

max
n

< (cid:15),

(8)

where

{˜tn,m} = {tn,m : |tn,m| > tthr}
and the selected set of eigenvalues {˜tn,m} is sorted in decreas-
ing absolute value.

(9)

B. Extension to Transient Simulations

The presented iterative algorithms consider transition matrix
and scattering dyadic representations at a single frequency.
However, in multi-frequency cases, such as FDTD simulations,
where a wide frequency response follows each numerical
evaluation, the algorithm could be altered to consider the entire
frequency interval. Provided multi-frequency simulations in
which all frequency points are excited with the same weighted
incident ﬁeld, steps 5–7 are evaluated for each frequency point.
This information is compiled and processed to provide an
updated incident ﬁeld in steps 8–9. One could consider speciﬁc
points in the interval; the highest frequency point, as without
any prior knowledge of the object, this is the region with the

3

most potential modes; or possibly the frequency point in which
the sum of the estimated modal signiﬁcances is the highest.
The latter option evaluated every iteration of the algorithm
provided the best results.

VI. NUMERICAL EXAMPLES
As a demonstration of the proposed procedure, we consider
the characteristic modes of a cylindrical dielectric resonator
antenna on a ﬁnite ground plane [14]. The cylinder has a
diameter of 10.5 mm, a height of 2.3 mm, and a relative
permittivity of εr = 38. It is placed on top of the center of
a perfectly-electrically-conducting square plate of side length
42 mm, see Fig. 1

To calculate the characteristic modes of this structure, a
realization of Algorithm 2 was implemented using an itera-
tive FEM-MoM hybrid solver within Altair FEKO [15]. The
discrete representation of the scattering dyadic is set up with
Lebedev quadrature [9] of a degree 146 and a dimension of
N = 292. Convergence of characteristic mode eigenvalues
is demonstrated in Fig. 1, where the number of correctly
evaluated digits is plotted as a function of mode index and
iteration number. Dark colors indicate convergence, while
light colors correspond to modes that are not yet converged.
For all three studied frequencies, the number of converged
modes is approximately the number of iterations (see diagonal
m = n line), though an offset of approximately 10 iterations
is required to obtain any converged eigenvalues in the highest
frequency case.

Horizontal lines indicate the number of modes with modal
signiﬁcances above 10−2 and 10−5, while vertical lines in-
dicate the number of iterations to resolve all modes above
these thresholds. In practical applications of characteristic
modes, only modes above the |tn| < 10−2 line are typically
considered. For the lowest frequency (f = 1 GHz), the data in
Fig. 1 show that only six simulations are required to accurately
compute these dominant modes, much fewer than the 292
solutions required to construct the entire matrix representing
the scattering dyadic. This trend also holds for the two higher
frequencies, where 14 and 30 iterations are required.

Furthermore, a multi-frequency implementation of Algo-
rithm 2 was constructed using the scattering matrix obtained
through an FDTD solver, FIT in CST Studio Suite 2022 [16].
Similar to the FEM calculations above, the scattering matrix
has dimension N = 292 at each frequency point. The
20 highest modal signiﬁcances from the complete scattering
matrix are displayed in the frequency interval 1–7 GHz in
the three panels of Fig. 2 in dashed lines and serve as a
visual reference for the results of the discretized Algorithm
2 extensions to transient simulations displayed in solid lines.
Due to limitations in software the full matrices were used
to generate the responses of simultaneous excitations with
arbitrary complex weights. With 7 iterative excitations, top
panel, the emergence of the modes can be seen with an only
partial agreement. Using an intermediate of 14 excitations
most signiﬁcant modes are present but not fully reconstructed.
Finally, in this numerical example, 28 excitations were sufﬁ-
cient to produce visually indistinguishable modes compared to
the full-matrix, a reduction of 90 %.

4

Fig. 1. Number of correctly evaluated digits of eigenvalues tn depending on the number of iterations m. The number of digits is evaluated from the comparison
with the decomposition of fully constructed scattering dyadic as described in [9], 292 plane waves being used. The full-wave solver used to gather the data
is FEM-MoM hybrid implemented in Altair FEKO [15]. The horizontal solid and dashed lines indicate characteristic modes reaching depicted thresholds of
modal signiﬁcance. The corresponding vertical solid and dashed line shows the number of iterations m required to acquire these modes.

VII. DISCUSSION

To na¨ıvely construct

the transition matrix or a discrete
representation of the scattering dyadic of dimension N re-
quires N full-wave evaluations. Estimates for the minimum
dimension Nmin required to resolve characteristic modes to
a prescribed precision are available in the literature [7],
[9], though these estimates tend to be quite conservative. A
dominant trend, however, is that the dimension Nmin generally
increases with the electrical size of the object under consider-
ation. In the iterative approach presented here, the dominant
K eigenvalues of the scattering dyadic or transition matrix are
estimated accurately using approximately K0 + K iterations,
i.e., in linear time with some offset K0. While the values
of the parameters Nmin and K0 are difﬁcult to quantitatively
predict due to their dependence on both geometric complexity
and electrical size, it holds that if the scattering dyadic or
transition matrix has dimension N sufﬁcient to resolve K
characteristic modes, then the iterative cost K0 + K is at
worst equal to N . This indicates that the iterative algorithm
cannot perform worse, in terms of computational time, than
full, explicit calculation. Nevertheless, the exact quantitative
speed-up afforded by the iterative algorithm depends on the
dimension N of the matrices being approximated, which can
be skewed by a priori knowledge of the modal structure of
the system being studied. For instance, incorrectly setting N
unnecessarily high will lead to artiﬁcially high speed-up, while
prior knowledge of the number of signiﬁcant modes might
allow for the na¨ıve approach to realize accurate results with
small N , thus greatly reducing the observed speed-up afforded
by the iterative approach.

While based on a fundamentally different formulation of
characteristic modes, the proposed iterative approach shares
some motivational aspects with matrix-free methods for com-
puting characteristic modes of large structures [17], where

Fig. 2. The 20 highest modal signiﬁcances of a dielectric cylinder on
a ﬁnite ground plane in the frequency interval 1–7 GHz obtained from a
scattering matrix obtained using 292 excitations (dashed) and the estimates
from m ∈ {7, 14, 28} iterative evaluations (solid) with a discretized version
of Algorithm 2.

21222324216111621263136|tn|≥10−5|tn|≥10−2m=nlowerrorhigherroriterationmmodenf=1GHz212223242|tn|≥10−5|tn|≥10−2m=niterationmf=4GHz212223242|tn|≥10−5|tn|≥10−2m=niterationmf=7GHzcorrectdigits≥4321042mm00.20.40.60.81|tn|=1/p1+λ2n7eval.292eval.00.20.40.60.81|tn|=1/p1+λ2n14eval.292eval.123456700.20.40.60.81Frequency(GHz)|tn|=1/p1+λ2n28eval.292eval.5

matrix-vector multiplications are implemented using MLMFA
within iterative eigenvalue algorithms to avoid the high cost of
computing, storing, and inverting large impedance matrices. In
contrast to that work, however, the approach taken here utilizes
an iterative approach to reduce the high computational burden
of computing the scattering matrix, rather than circumventing
its computation altogether.

REFERENCES

[1] B. K. Lau, M. Capek, and A. M. Hassan, “Characteristic Modes:
Progress, Overview, and Emerging Topics,” IEEE Antennas and Propa-
gation Magazine, vol. 64, no. 2, pp. 14–22, 2022.

[2] M. Capek and K. Schab, “Computational Aspects of Characteristic
Mode Decomposition: An Overview,” IEEE Antennas and Propagation
Magazine, vol. 64, no. 2, pp. 23–31, 2022.

[3] J. J. Adams, S. Genovesi, B. Yang, and E. Antonino-Daviu, “Antenna
Element Design Using Characteristic Mode Analysis: Insights and Re-
search Directions,” IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 64,
no. 2, pp. 32–40, 2022.

[4] H. Li, Y. Chen, and U. Jakobus, “Synthesis, Control, and Excitation
of Characteristic Modes for Platform-Integrated Antenna Designs: A
Design Philosophy,” IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 64,
no. 2, pp. 41–48, 2022.

[5] D. Manteuffel, F. H. Lin, T. Li, N. Peitzmeier, and Z. N. Chen,
“Characteristic Mode-Inspired Advanced Multiple Antennas: Intuitive
Insight Into Element-, Interelement-, and Array Levels of Compact Large
Arrays and Metantennas,” IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine,
vol. 64, no. 2, pp. 49–57, 2022.

[6] R. F. Harrington and J. R. Mautz, “Computation of Characteristic Modes
for Conducting Bodies,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 19, no. 5,
pp. 629–639, Sept. 1971.

[7] M. Gustafsson, L. Jelinek, K. Schab, and M. Capek, “Uniﬁed The-
ory of Characteristic Modes: Part I – Fundamentals,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2109.00063, 2021.

[8] ——, “Uniﬁed Theory of Characteristic Modes: Part II – Tracking,
Losses, and FEM Evaluation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.02106, 2021.
[9] M. Capek, J. Lundgren, M. Gustafsson, K. Schab, and L. Jelinek,
“Characteristic Mode Decomposition Using the Scattering Dyadic in
Arbitrary Full-Wave Solvers,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.06783, 2022.
[10] G. Kristensson, Scattering of Electromagnetic Waves by Obstacles.

Edison, NJ: SciTech Publishing, an imprint of the IET, 2016.

[11] J.-M. Jin, Theory and Computation of Electromagnetic Fields. Wiley,

2010.

[12] M. A. Davenport and J. Romberg, “An Overview of Low-Rank Matrix
Recovery From Incomplete Observations,” IEEE Journal of Selected
Topics in Signal Processing, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 608–622, 2016.
[13] G. H. Golub and C. F. Van Loan, Matrix Computations. Johns Hopkins

University Press, 2012.

[14] S. Huang, C.-F. Wang, J. Pan, and D. Yang, “Accurate Sub-Structure
Characteristic Mode Analysis of Dielectric Resonator Antennas With
Finite Ground Plane,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation,
vol. 69, no. 10, pp. 6930–6935, 2021.

[15] (2022) Altair FEKO. Altair. [Online]. Available: https://www.altair.com/

feko/

[16] (2022) Simulia CST Studio Suite. Dassault Systemes. [Online]. Avail-
able: www.3ds.com/products-services/simulia/products/cst-studio-suite/
[17] Q. I. Dai, J. Wu, H. Gan, Q. S. Liu, W. C. Chew, and E. Wei, “Large-
Scale Characteristic Mode Analysis With Fast Multipole Algorithms,”
IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 64, no. 7, pp.
2608–2616, 2016.

