Pathﬁnder – Navigating and Analyzing
Chemical Reaction Networks with an
Eﬃcient Graph-based Approach

Paul L. T¨urtscher1 and Markus Reiher2

Laboratory of Physical Chemistry, ETH Zurich,
Vladimir-Prelog-Weg 2, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland

September 08, 2022

While the ﬁeld of ﬁrst-principles explorations into chemical reaction space has been
continuously growing, the development of strategies for analyzing resulting chem-
ical reaction networks (CRNs) is lagging behind. A CRN consists of compounds
linked by reactions. Analyzing how these compounds are transformed into one
another based on kinetic modelling is a non-trivial task. Here, we present the
graph-optimization-driven algorithm and program Pathfinder to allow for such
an analysis of a CRN. By encoding the reactions of a CRN as a graph consisting of
compound and reaction nodes and adding information about activation barriers as
well as required reagents to the edges of the graph yields a complete graph-theoretical
representation of the CRN. Since the probabilities of the formation of compounds
depend on the starting conditions, the consumption of any compound during a re-
action must be accounted for to reﬂect the availability of reagents. To account for
this, we introduce compound costs to reﬂect compound availability. We ﬁrst illus-
trate the working principle on an abstract small CRN. Afterwards, Pathfinder is
demonstrated at the example of the disproportionation of iodine with water and the
comproportionation of iodic acid and hydrogen iodide. Both processes are analyzed
within the same CRN which we construct with our autonomous ﬁrst-principles CRN
exploration software Chemoton [arXiv:2202.13011] guided by Pathfinder.

1ORCID: 0000-0002-7021-5643
2Corresponding author; e-mail: markus.reiher@phys.chem.ethz.ch; ORCID: 0000-0002-9508-

1565

1

2
2
0
2

p
e
S
8

]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
9
3
0
4
0
.
9
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
1

Introduction

Chemical reaction networks (CRNs) are molecular transformation webs with com-
pounds connected by chemical reactions. Various computational strategies have
been reported in the literature to explore chemical reaction space with quantum
chemical methods and map out such CRNs. 1–7 These advanced exploration tech-
niques make CRNs with increasing numbers of compounds and reactions accessible.
Alongside, the challenge of analyzing such large and interwoven networks is slowly
surfacing. Due to the high connectivity of a CRN, it is non-trivial to assess how
speciﬁc compounds are formed. This complexity is due to the fact that a compound
of interest is likely formed through various reaction channels, each channel consist-
ing of a sequence of reactions. This multitude of options raises the question which
channel or path is most frequently followed.
Microkinetic modeling 8–12 to approach this problem may not be viable, if very many
coupled ordinary diﬀerential equations that describe all concentration changes are
to be considered and span largely diﬀerent time scales. Then, the time required to
simulate concentration ﬂuxes through such a CRN can be exceedingly long. More-
over, the sequence of reactions which form a compound in question is not directly
retrieved.
However, the CRN can be represented as a graph (see, e.g., Refs. 5,13,14). A graph
is an obvious representation as all compounds are interconnected via reactions in a
CRN. For instance, a compound can be a reagent of one and the product of another
reaction. Once the graph is established, it can be analyzed to identify the shortest
simple path between two compounds. A shortest simple path is of minimal length
with the lowest possible sum of the edge weights and nodes that are only visited
once. Shortest path is to be understood as the most eﬃcient path, not necessarily
the path with the least number of steps (reactions). In the context of this work, the
shortest path is the most probable sequence of reactions from a source node to a
target node expressed by the lowest possible sum of edge weights.
Determining the most probable sequence of reactions between two compounds is a
shortest path problem. Extracting such paths in terms of a likelihood for reaction
mechanisms and synthesis routes has been accomplished based on depth-ﬁrst al-
gorithms. 15–17 A drawback of these approaches is that they are speciﬁcally tailored
solutions for a specially constructed and pruned CRN. For example, the stoichiomet-
ric requirements of a reaction are not considered or circumvented by construction.
This makes these approaches not generally applicable and insuﬃcient for larger net-
works.
Persson and co-workers employed eﬃcient algorithms from graph theory to identify
paths in a CRN. 18,19 This allowed them to ﬁnd one or multiple shortest paths with
Dijkstra’s 20 and Yen’s 21 algorithms in CRNs containing only three types of reac-

2

tions and thermodynamic information. These authors extended their approach to
problems of solid-state material synthesis where the CRN consists of phases instead
of compounds. 22
For large CRNs, a graph-based approach identifying connections between com-
pounds is computationally too demanding and requires a Monte Carlo-based strat-
egy. 23 Such an approach has been exploited to study the formation of solid-electrode
interfaces. 24 However, the challenge of analyzing a CRN is rooted in its construc-
tion. The construction of the CRN in Ref. 23 relies on enumeration and ﬁltering of
all stoichiometrically valid reactions based on a set of compounds. The compounds
of a set have the same composition in terms of their atoms (identical molecular
formula). Reactions are then generated by choosing all possible combinations of
two compounds in each set, each compound for one side of the reaction. During
construction of a CRN it is not validated whether the two sides of a reaction are
actually connected through a transition state. Each set consisting of m compounds
results initially in m!/(m − 2)! reactions. For instance, a set with 10 compounds
yields 90 reactions, a set with 50 compounds already 2450 reactions. By applying ﬁl-
ters to the initial reactions, the number of reactions decreases. Still, the underlying
combinatorial approach in Ref. 23 produced a CRN with about 86000000 reactions.
By contrast, the exploration strategy developed in our group 25–27 explores CRNs
through ab initio calculations. Accordingly, all reactions discovered connect com-
pounds at least via one elementary step with a transition state. Hence, a combinato-
rial approach, which assumes that all reactions are possible followed by a subsequent
ﬁltering, is avoided.
In this work, we present a unique graph-based approach to represent any multi-
reactant reaction in a CRN including kinetic and stoichiometric information that
then allows for the identiﬁcation shortest paths between any two compounds. The
term reaction is to be understood in the most general sense in this context; it can
involve catalysts, solvents, and surfaces. Building the graph is neither aﬀected by
the type of reactant nor does it require a tailored template to represent it. The
stoichiometric requirements encoded in the graph carry information about which
reagents are consumed when one compound node is transformed into another one.
Including the stoichiometry alongside kinetic information for a speciﬁc reaction in
the graph is crucial for the assessment of how costly it is to traverse the network
through the corresponding reaction node in the graph, since it is, in addition to the
reaction barrier, important to know whether the necessary reagents are available at
all. Then, the graph representation allows to query the network for the shortest
simple path between any two nodes employing eﬃcient pathﬁnding algorithms. The
analysis of a CRN based on given starting conditions returns a ranking of its com-
pounds corresponding to the probabilities of encountering them. Based on such a
ranking, a running CRN exploration can be steered on the ﬂy and, therefore, focused
on kinetically relevant areas of the network.

3

We introduce our Pathfinder algorithm in Sec. 2, apply it to an abstract network
taken from the literature 18 in Sec. 4.1, and illustrate its predictive power for the dis-
proportionation of I2 with H2O, 28–31 for which we provide a new CRN of gas-phase
reactions. In this case, Pathfinder fulﬁlls two tasks: guiding the exploration and
analyzing the ﬁnal CRN in order to allow for a comparison of paths from I2 to iodic
acid, HIO3, and vice versa.

2 Theory

We adopt the notation for ﬁrst-principles CRNs from Ref. 27: A chemical structure
is given by a ﬁxed atom type and number, ﬁxed nuclear positions, a ﬁxed number
of electrons and total spin.
It therefore represents a speciﬁc point on the Born-
Oppenheimer potential energy surface. By contrast, a compound denotes a set of
chemical structures with the same atom types and number, charge, spin, stereo-
chemistry, and, most importantly, connectivity. For instance, the boat and chair
conformations of cyclohexane, clearly diﬀerent structures, are considered the same
compound. A reaction is deﬁned as a collection of elementary steps that connect
compounds, whereas an elementary step within a reaction connects structures of
these compounds by diﬀerent transition states (TSs).

Given a CRN deﬁned for a set of compounds and reactions, one is interested in
the kinetically most likely sequence of reactions within this CRN connecting two
given compounds. We dissect the search for such sequences into three steps: First,
a graph network is built from chemical reactions. Second, a cost measure for the
probability of a reactant being available for a reaction is evaluated. We refer to this
cost as compound cost. Third, the graph network is updated with the information
about the costs of the reactants. These three steps are sketched in Fig. 1.

The compound costs will depend on which compounds are available with some prob-
ability at the start. The probabilities can be derived from compound concentration
ratios of concentrations, pressure or volume. The starting conditions can be de-
liberately chosen. Given the costs for at least one reactant, the costs for all other
reactants follow (for details see below).

The resulting graph representation of the CRN can be queried for sequences of
reactions, named paths in this context. A typical query asks for the shortest paths
starting from one starting compound to a compound of interest. The obtained paths
between two compounds are ordered by their path length which is linked to their
probability.

4

Figure 1: Schematic representation of the three steps necessary to convert a CRN to
a graph containing kinetic as well as stoichiometric information. Input and output
are colored in blue, operations sequentially performed on the input in gray and the
intermediate objects in dark blue.

2.1 Graph-theoretical Representation of Reactions

In a given list of reactions (see Sec. 3 for details on their exploration), each reaction
corresponds to a subgraph of the graph representation of the whole CRN. There-
fore, the whole CRN is built by sequentially adding (parts) of such a subgraph.
Two ’reaction nodes’ represent the TS structure of the reaction with the additional
information from which side of the reaction the reactants approached the TS. Ac-
cordingly, they are labeled as ‘left hand side’ (LHS) reaction node in case one starts
from the reactants and ‘right hand side’ (RHS) reaction node in case one starts from
the products, although such an assignment is to a certain degree arbitrary and solely
serves the purpose to allow for directional distinction. In our context, the way a re-
action is formulated depends on how our reactions exploration software Chemoton
stored the reaction in the database. The assignment itself does not alter the graph
as reaction nodes are only connected to reactants and products of a reaction.

Next, the reactants and products will be added to the network as nodes if they
have not already been included in the CRN yet. The added nodes are connected
with directional edges where reactants are linked to the LHS reaction node and the
LHS reaction node then to the products. In turn, the products are connected to the
RHS reaction node and the RHS reaction node then to the reactants. The edges are
directional to enforce the traversal from one side to the other as shown in Fig. 2.

Furthermore, an edge contains an edge weight (measuring how costly it is to traverse
this edge), a list of required compounds, and the sum over the compound costs of
the reagents in the required compounds list. These terms are explained in detail in
Sec. 2.2. A schematic representation of this architecture is shown in Fig. 2. This
architecture allows to encode any kind of reaction from the CRN in the graph, re-
gardless of the number of involved reactants or emerging products.

5

Pathfinder Pipeline: CRN to GraphInput CRN Graph withkinetic edgeweights onlyCompoundCostsConstruct graphDeterminecompoundcostsUpdate graphwith compoundcostsI.II.III.Kinetic WeightCompound CostsFinal GraphwithFigure 2: a) Prototypical chemical reaction in a CRN. b) The same reaction in the
CRN represented as a graph. Compounds are depicted as blue nodes, the reaction
node ’L’ indicating the approach of the reactants toward the TS from the left hand
side as a red node, and the reaction node ’R’ indicating approaching the TS from
the right hand side as an orange node. c) Properties stored in the edge from a
compound node to a reaction node. Addends of the edge weight for the ﬁnal graph,
the kinetic weight and the compound costs. In this case, the required compound in
c) is B.

The size of the graph measured in terms of the numbers of nodes and edges grows
with each reaction added. At least two nodes will be added to the graph per reaction,
if all occurring compounds are already part of the graph. The maximum number
of added nodes per reaction is given by two plus the number of compounds of the
reaction which are yet to be included in the existing graph. Concerning the number
of edges per reaction, the reaction nodes have incoming edges equal to the reacting
compounds and outgoing edges equal to the number of product compounds. Hence,
the number of edges per added reaction is the number of compounds of the reaction
times two.

The problem at hand is a shortest path problem, hence a long edge indicates that
the traversal via this edge is unfavorable. The length of an edge, i.e., the edge
weight, is added as information to the edge when connecting the nodes as shown
in Fig. 2. Furthermore, the list of compounds required for this reaction is added.
This list will be key for the second step of our algorithm in order to determine the
costs for consuming compounds during a shortest path search. In the ﬁnal step of

6

LAA + BC + DLR◦ Kinetic Weight◦ Compound CostsR1LR2LR5LR6LR7LR8LR9LR10LR12LR4LR11LR1RR2RR3RR5RR6RR8RR9RR10RR11RR12RR7RR4RBDEFKHZLRABCDLRABCDa)b)c)- Edge Weight- Required Compoundsthe Pathfinder pipeline to convert a CRN to a graph containing kinetic as well
as stoichiometric information, the sum over all compound costs of the compounds
in the list of required compounds is written to the edge as compound costs. This
sum is then added to the existing edge weight and allows us to consider the cost
of consuming the required compounds of each reaction when querying the resulting
graph directly.

2.2 Kinetic Weights

The initial weights for edges from compound nodes to reaction nodes, C/D → R and
A/B → L, are based on the free activation energies, ∆GTS-LHS or ∆GTS-RHS, of the
reaction. The free activation energies themselves are not suitable as edge weights
as they are not reﬂecting the exponential character considering kinetics. Hence, the
free activation energy is turned into a rate constant. The rate constant ki, denoting
kLHS and kRHS of reaction i in a simpliﬁed notation, can be obtained according to
Eyring’s absolute rate theory,

ki =

kBT
h

(cid:18)

exp

−

∆GTS-i
RT

(cid:19)

,

(1)

where T is the temperature, kB Boltzmann’s constant, h Planck’s constant, and
R the ideal gas constant (accordingly, the energy diﬀerence is then to be given in
energy units per mole substance).
Note that the edge weights from reaction nodes to product nodes (e.g., L → C/D
and R → A/B in Fig. 2) are set to zero throughout this work as the reaction progress
from the TS to the product is energetically downhill in an elementary step.

Since rate constants are not directly suitable as edge weights in a shortest path
problem (owing to the anticorrelation that large rates would correspond to short
paths), we consider a few additional steps. Moreover, we note that rate constants
can cover a large range of magnitudes, e.g., from 1 × 10−12 s−1 to 1 × 1012 s−1. Hence,
when adding edge weights, very small weights will hardly aﬀect the total sum if a
large edge weight is already part of the path. A large range of weights is therefore
disadvantageous for the rigorous assessment of the shortest path problem, because
paths going via diﬀerent reactions besides one with a large edge weight would end
up with the same length.
The correspondence of low reaction barrier to low edge weight as required for the
shortest path problem could be solved by taking the inverse of ki, 1/ki [s]. A low
barrier would then correspond to a short time (low weight) to traverse an edge, but
the problem of a large spread for the edge weights remains. Hence, to minimize the
spread we normalize each rate constant ki by the sum over all rate constants in the

7

CRN to obtain the relative rate constant pi with

pi =

ki

all kLHS(cid:80)

kl +

all kRHS(cid:80)

l

r

.

kr

(2)

This deﬁnition can be rationalized by recalling that the rate vi of a reaction i is
given by

vi = ki

reactants
(cid:89)

cj,

j

(3)

where cj are the (time-dependent) concentrations of the reactants. If all concentra-
tions of all reactants are considered equal to 1 mol/l and time-independent, the rate
vi will be simply given by the rate constant ki. This assumption may also be un-
derstood literally as a short-time approximation to a case, in which all compounds
(also the stable intermediates usually produced only later in the course of a reaction
starting from one or two reactants) are already available right from the start and at a
concentration of 1 mol/l. This assumption is necessary to avoid explicit propagation
of concentration ﬂows through microkinetic modeling, because this would be far too
time consuming. Under this short-time all-species-present assumption, the relative
rate constant pi in a CRN is equal to the relative rate and can be interpreted as a
measure for the likelihood or probability of the reaction step i to occur relative to
all other reaction steps in the CRN. The probability of a sequence of reaction steps
is the product of the individual reaction probabilities, assuming that each reaction
is independent of all other reactions (cf. Eq. (2)).

Since a high probability of a path corresponds to a high likelihood that the path’s
product is formed through this reaction sequence, it still contradicts the requirement
of a low edge weight for a favorable shortest path. Therefore, we introduce a cost
function f (pi),

f (pi) = −ln(pi) = ln

(cid:19)

(cid:18) 1
pi

≡ wi,

(4)

which possesses the salient feature that it results in weights wi which are additive
to yield a total weight (instead of multiplicative probabilities that yield a total
probability):

wtot = w1 + w2 + w3 + · · · + wi
(cid:19)

(cid:19)

= ln

= ln

(cid:18) 1
p1
(cid:18) 1
p1

(cid:18) 1
p2

. . .

+ ln

1
p2

1
p3

(cid:19)

1
pi

(cid:19)

(cid:18) 1
p3
(cid:18) 1
ptot

= ln

(cid:19)

,

+ ln

+ · · · + ln

8

(cid:19)

(cid:18) 1
pi

(5)

where wtot is the total weight or length of a path and ptot its total probability.
Note in this context that shortest-path algorithms typically sum over the weight of
edges to determine a shortest path. 32 The edge weights wi are given in arbitrary
units abbreviated as a.u. throughout this work. We call these weights derived from
activation barriers entering our deﬁnition of the cost function kinetic weights.

2.3 Compound Costs

If a compound can only be reached through reactions with high barriers, it may be
unlikely that it can be formed under certain reaction conditions. This fact must
be considered when consuming the compound in another reaction, for which it will
simply not be available. Hence, querying a CRN which encodes only the kinetic
weights as edge weights would lack information about the stoichiometric requirement
that compound C produced from compound A requires compound B as reactant in
our example in Figure 2. To take this into account, we introduce a compound cost
ci for every compound i in the graph. For one edge from a compound node to a
reaction node, the additional costs caused by consuming the required compounds
are encoded as the sum over the compound costs of all compounds required for a
reaction. This sum of costs added to the edge weight wi,

w(cid:48)

i = wi +

required
compounds
(cid:88)

cl,

l

(6)

i. w(cid:48)

results in w(cid:48)
i of an edge i is calculated on-the-ﬂy when searching for the shortest
path for determining the compound costs, the graph itself is not altered yet. A
compound cost ci is deﬁned as the shortest path from one of the starting compounds
to the compound i, considering the kinetic weight and the sum of compound costs
of the required compounds,

ci = cstart +

= cstart +

→R/L edges
in shortest path
(cid:88)

j

→R/L edges
in shortest path
(cid:88)

j

w(cid:48)
j




wj +

required
compounds
(cid:88)

l



cl


 ,

(7)

where cstart corresponds to the compound cost of the path’s starting compound.
As the determination of the compound cost ci requires other compound costs, the
costs must be determined iteratively, given the CRN and the starting conditions, to

9

obtain self-consistent compound costs, ci,sc. Hence, Eq. 7 is re-written as

ci,n = cstart +

→R/L edges
in shortest path
(cid:88)

j




wj +

required
compounds
(cid:88)

l



cl,n−1


 ,

(8)

where n indicates the current iteration step.

The algorithm to determine the compound costs is outlined in Fig. 3. To determine
the required compound costs for all compounds in the CRN, we deﬁne starting
conditions by assigning compound costs to selected starting compounds. These
compounds are those compounds available at the initialization of a reactive system
under consideration, similar to reactants present in a ﬂask at the beginning of a
reaction in an experiment.

When calculating costs of all other compounds, denoted here as ’unknown com-
pounds’, the results will depend on the chosen starting compounds and their costs.
Hence, one can end up with diﬀerent compound costs by choosing diﬀerent starting
conditions. Before starting the ﬁrst iteration, all unknown compounds are assigned
an inﬁnite positive cost,

ci,0 =

(cid:40)

0 ≤ x < ∞,

i ∈ starting compounds

∞,

otherwise.

(9)

and with the compound costs for the starting compounds, all compounds have a
ci,0 assigned. Then, the algorithm starts an outer loop over the set of starting com-
pounds, the ﬁrst iteration (n = 1), and an inner loop over all unknown compounds.

The shortest path from a starting compound to a target compound is found with
Dijkstra’s algorithm. 20 In principle, any other algorithm to determine the shortest
path between the two compounds could be employed.
If compounds of inﬁnite costs would need to be consumed along the shortest path to
a target compound, the algorithm stops any further analysis of this path and instead
continues to ﬁnd a path for the next target compound. If the shortest path does
not require consumption of compounds with inﬁnite cost, the compound cost of the
starting compound is added to the current total path weight (see Eq. 8) resulting in
c(cid:48)
i,n for the target compound i. The current total weight c(cid:48)
i,n is calculated as stated
in Eq.8. Employing compound costs of the previous iteration ensures that the order
of compounds analyzed is not relevant during an iteration over all compounds. The
current total weight c(cid:48)
i,n if
c(cid:48)
i,n < ci,n−1 and, if ci,n has been previously deﬁned, c(cid:48)
After iterating over all starting compounds, the compound costs of the current iter-
ation are completed with ci,n−1 for all compounds where the condition c(cid:48)
i,n < ci,n−1

i,n for the target compound i will be deﬁned as ci,n := c(cid:48)

i,n < ci,n.

10

Figure 3: Flow chart of the algorithm to determine the compound costs in a CRN
graph.

was not met. This guarantees that all compounds have a cost assigned for a possible
subsequent iteration step.

Finally, it is inquired whether the costs of the compounds have converged. Conver-
gence will be achieved if all compounds have costs smaller than the assigned inﬁnite

11

Set start conditions,, Loop over  starting compoundsSet all othercompounds to , , Get next target compound Find shortest pathfrom start compoundto target compoundPath length   contains no compound  with ?Current path length  shorter than  and,  if available, Set Last compound?Last startingcompound?Complete compoundcosts with  for allcompounds where Converged?All compound costsdeterminedNoNoYesNoYesNoYesNoYesNoYesvalue and self-consistency in the costs is reached. Self-consistency is achieved if
none of the compound costs were altered in the current iteration. The loop over
the starting compounds is restarted until convergence. Upon convergence, all com-
pounds have costs assigned characterizing the length of the shortest paths from a
starting compound to them and we achieve convergence, i.e.,

ci,sc := ci,n

(10)

for all compounds i, i ∈ unknown compounds.

2.4 Update Graph to Include Compound Costs in Edge

Weights

With the self-consistent compound costs determined, the edges and edge weights of
the graph are updated. The sum of all compound costs Ci in an edges i

Ci =

required
compounds
(cid:88)

l

cl,sc,

(11)

is stored in the corresponding compound-costs array. Ci is then added to the edge
weight wi,

wf

i = wi + Ci,

(12)

resulting in wf
i which is set as the edge weight of an edge from a compound node to
a reaction node (compare Fig. 2c). Consequently, the edge weight holds the kinetic
information as well as the information about the accessibility of the required com-
pounds to traverse along this edge. In this way, ﬁnal edge weights in the updated
graph of a CRN depend on the chosen starting conditions. By altering the starting
conditions of the identical CRN, graphs with diﬀerent compound costs and, conse-
quently, diﬀerent edge weights can be obtained and compared.
The graph can now be queried from any source compound to any other target com-
pound. The shortest paths between these two nodes are determined with Yen’s
algorithm, 21 which in turn is based on Dijkstra’s algorithm. 20 The returned path
consists of a sequence of compound nodes and reaction nodes and the total weight
or length of the path.

3 Computational Methodology

Pathfinder implements our approach described so far in Python3. It can process
network data produced by our autonomous ﬁrst-principles CRN exploration software

12

Chemoton. 27,33 The CRN’s graph is represented and the shortest path is queried
through the Python3 package NetworkX. 32 Parts of Pathfinder are already
available open source and free of charge in SCINE Heron 34 and the full func-
tionality will be made available with future releases of Chemoton 35 and SCINE
Heron. 36 All data presented in this work were generated with this SCINE software
framework, 37 stored in and processed from the SCINE database. 38 All calculations
were handled by SCINE Puffin instances. 27,39 These instances interface SCINE
ReaDuct, 40,41 Molassembler 42,43 and the SCINE Utilities. 44 New elemen-
tary steps were found by elementary-step trials with SCINE Chemoton. 33 Details
on the options for the generating the trials are stated in the supporting informa-
tions (SI). To generate transition state guesses, the Newton Trajectory Algorithm 1
(NT1) 27 was selected. Detailed settings for all parts of the NT1 job are listed in the
SI. Chemoton assigns newly found elementary steps to reactions as well as new
structures to compounds in an automatic fashion based on their deﬁnitions outlined
in Sec. 2, thereby constructing the CRN. We refer the interested reader to Ref. 27
for a detailed description of the underlying algorithms.

For the construction of a chemical reaction network, a list of reactions is required.
The elementary steps of each reaction must consist of reactant structures and as-
signed energies as well as product structures and assigned energies. Both sets are
then supplemented with (free) activation energies for both reaction directions. This
information is easily accessible from an explored CRN when stored in a database. 27
In our framework, a reaction consists of multiple elementary steps, where each el-
ementary step features its own barrier height. Hence, each reaction is assigned a
range of activation energies, of which the lowest indicate those elementary steps with
highest probability to dominate the reaction’s mechanism. The obtained list of reac-
tions can be subjected to additional ﬁlter criteria. For instance, only reactions with
barriers in both direction below a given threshold may be forwarded to the ‘CRN to
Graph’ pipeline of Pathfinder (cf. Fig.1). The CRN generated with Chemoton
here and the graph representation obtained with Pathfinder will be made available
on Zenodo. To produce the raw data for the CRN, electronic-structure Kohn-Sham
density functional theory calculations were automatically launched by Puffin were
carried out with the program package Turbomole (V7.4.1), 45 applying the PBE
functional 46,47 with a def2-SVPD basis set 48–50 and semi-classical D3 dispersion cor-
rections. 51 All calculations were performed without imposing any point-group sym-
metry, i.e., in point group C1. We note that almost all activation barriers were
calculated as Gibbs free energy diﬀerences of transition state structures and stable
intermediates, assuming the rigid-rotor/harmonic-oscillator/particle-in-a-box model
at a temperature of 298.15 K and a pressure of 1 atm under ideal gas conditions. The
Hessian matrix required for the vibrational analysis in the harmonic-oscillator model
was calculated analytically with Turbomole. There are 17 exceptions where only

13

electronic energy diﬀerences were available because of monoatomic molecules on
either reactant or product site of the reaction. For each reaction, only the free acti-
vation energies of the elementary step with the TS with the lowest free energy are
considered as the key representative for a reaction under consideration. However, it
is also possible to employ a (weighted) average over all (free) activation energies.

4 Results and Discussion

4.1 Synthetic Example

We ﬁrst demonstrate the working principle of Pathfinder with the example of a
CRN consisting of the following 10 reactions:

A −−(cid:42)(cid:41)−− B
A −−(cid:42)(cid:41)−− D + E
A −−(cid:42)(cid:41)−− Y + Z
A −−(cid:42)(cid:41)−− F
Z −−(cid:42)(cid:41)−− B
B + D −−(cid:42)(cid:41)−− K
E + Z −−(cid:42)(cid:41)−− F
Y + Y −−(cid:42)(cid:41)−− K
B + B −−(cid:42)(cid:41)−− H
F + K −−(cid:42)(cid:41)−− H

wR1 = 6
wR2 = 1
wR3 = 2
wR4 = 4
wR5 = 3
wR6 = 1
wR7 = 2
wR8 = 4
wR9 = 3
wR10 = 1

(R1)

(R2)

(R3)

(R4)

(R5)

(R6)

(R7)

(R8)

(R9)

(R10)

The reactions R1–R10 and the initial edge weights in forward and backward di-
rections were taken from Blau et al. 18 Given only compound A at the start of the
reaction, we query the shortest path from A to H. At ﬁrst glance, the shortest
path in terms of the number of reactions is R1 yielding compound B followed by R9
producing compound H directly from two equivalents of compound B. However, the
weight via R1 is quite high and hence a path along this reaction will be unlikely. The
visual representation of the iterative determination of all compound costs (compare
Fig.3) is given in Fig.4.

In the ﬁrst iteration step of the Pathfinder algorithm, the compound costs (com-
pare Fig.4) of products from reactions only directly consuming the starting com-
pound A as a reagent were assigned. Compounds H and K were not accessible in

14

Figure 4: Determination of the compound costs in a model CRN of 10 reactions.
Compounds with assigned costs are shown in dark blue, compounds without in light
blue. LHS reaction nodes are represented in red, RHS reaction nodes in orange. At
the start, only the starting compound has a compound cost (top left). After the ﬁrst
iteration step, all compounds, apart from compounds K and H, have a compound
cost assigned (top right). After the second iteration step, also compounds K and H
carry compound costs (bottom left). Not depicted here is the ﬁnal third iteration
step, which is performed to control if new paths including K and/or H can be found.
Bottom right: the shortest path from compound A to compound H is highlighted,
all other nodes and edges are shown in gray.

the ﬁrst iteration as reactions forming those two require reactants not initially avail-
able. In the second iteration step, valid paths to the two remaining compounds were
found such that all compounds ultimately had a cost assigned. In the third and last
step, it was checked whether the availability of the two new compounds lowered any

15

StartAfter1st IterationAfter2nd IterationShortest PathA - HABDEFKHYZR1LR1RR2LR2RR3LR3RR4LR4RR5LR5RR6LR6RR7LR7RR8LR8RR9LR9RR10LR10RGR11RR11LR12RR12LABDEFKHYZR1LR1RR2LR2RR3LR3RR4LR4RR5LR5RR6LR6RR7LR7RR8LR8RR9LR9RR10LR10RGR11RR11LR12RR12LABDEFKHYZR1LR1RR2LR2RR3LR3RR4LR4RR5LR5RR6LR6RR7LR7RR8LR8RR9LR10RR9RR10LGR11RR11LR12RR12LABDEFKHYZR1LR1RR2LR2RR3LR3RR4LR4RR5LR5RR6LR6RR7LR7RR8LR8RR9LR9RR10LR10RGR11RR11LR12RR12Lof the previously determined compound costs, which turned out to be not the case
in this example.

To probe internal consistency of the compound cost determination, we added two
reactions, R11 and R12, to the CRN (R1–R10):

A −−(cid:42)(cid:41)−− G
K + K −−(cid:42)(cid:41)−− G + H

wR11 = 8
wR12 = 1

(R11)

(R12)

Although R11 is quite costly, the only path to G was through this reaction in the
ﬁrst iteration step. As compounds L and H were only encountered in the second
iteration step, the compound cost of G could only be reduced when the costs for the
other two compounds were determined. This was accomplished in the third iteration
step which caused Pathfinder to iterate a fourth time. In the fourth step, it was
probed whether the new compound cost of G caused any other compound costs to
change.

4.2 Exploration of I2 with H2O

We now turn to a CRN produced with our Chemoton exploration software. The
Chemoton driven ﬁrst-principles exploration was guided on-the-ﬂy by the ranking
of compounds provided by Pathfinder. The initial starting reagents were chosen
to be iodine and water only. I2 was assigned a compound cost of 1.0 a.u., H2O a
compound cost of 0.45 a.u.. This corresponded approximately to a ratio of I2 : H2O
of 1 : 2 and hence to a probability of 36 % (e−1.0) for I2 and 64 % (e−0.45) for H2O at
the start of the reaction. During the guided exploration, a total of 49710 structures
as well as 15519 elementary steps from 100997 elementary-step trials were found by
Chemoton.

The structures and elementary steps found were aggregated into a total of 1157 com-
pounds and 4540 reactions. Given the simplicity and small size of our starting
molecules, this number of compounds is astonishing. However, as an iodine atom is
able to form up to seven bonds, quite similar to transition metals, the ﬁrst coordi-
nation sphere of iodine can vary signiﬁcantly. For instance, orthoperiodic acid and
diperiodate species coordinate six oxygen atoms per iodine atom. 52 Accordingly, the
surprisingly large number of compounds is produced by a varying number of atoms
bound to I and by their diﬀerent types (and environments) – similar to ligands in
transition metal complexes.
In addition, stereoisomers (cis/trans, fac/mer) come
into play. As two iodine atoms can bind either directly or be bonded via a bridg-

16

ing oxygen atom, the number of theoretically possible compounds grows even more.
These compounds might be high in energy and, hence, meta-stable; nevertheless,
they are minima on the investigated potential energy surface. However, we empha-
size that all species found in our network are, by construction, uncharged species in
the gas phase. Hence, important solvation eﬀects are absent, and therefore, charged
species are not present.

Figure 5: Lewis structures, molecular formulae, and compound costs determined
with starting conditions set for the disproportionation of the six compounds with
costs below 100 a.u..

During the exploration, the growing CRN was repeatedly analyzed with Pathfinder
to determine the compound costs of all other compounds found. When starting from
I2 and H2O, all compounds with a compound cost below 100 a.u. (6 compounds in to-
tal) were allowed in unimolecular and bimolecular elementary-step trials in the CRN
exploration process. Compounds with a compound cost 100 a.u. < wi < 200 a.u.
were only reacted with each other and with the six cheapest compounds, elementary-
step trials with themselves were not permitted in the exploration process. For all
compounds with costs above 200 a.u., only trials with the six cheapest compounds
were probed to limit the total number of trials. 6 The rationale behind these choices
is that the likeliest encounter of compounds with a high cost is with compounds of
low costs. The six compounds with costs below 100 a.u. are shown in Fig. 5, includ-
ing the starting materials H2O and I2. All compounds with a cost below the one of
HIO3 and including HIO3 were probed for trials in the exploration with Chemoton.

After completion of these trials, the CRN was analyzed with diﬀerent starting con-
ditions to investigate the reactivity of HIO3 with H2O and the resulting products;
namely, HIO3 and H2O with compound costs set to 1.0 a.u. and 0.45 H2O had the
same cost assigned as in the Pathfinder analyses before, the compound cost of
HIO3 equaled the cost of I2 of the preceding exploration round. Due to the diﬀerent
starting conditions, compound costs were diﬀerent compared to the analysis with I2
instead of HIO3 as starting conditions. Compounds with costs up to 34 a.u. were
only combined with H2O in elementary-step trials as we were solely interested in
reactions with H2O at this point.

The graph of the CRN was build from 3916 of the 4540 found reactions. 624 reactions
were not considered, because either the forward or the backward reaction barriers
were below 4.5 kJ/mol. Reactions with barriers below this threshold were considered

17

technical failures and therefore not included in the graph. Hence, the resulting graph
consisted of 1046 compound nodes and 7832 reaction nodes (LHS nodes and RHS
nodes) with 29212 edges.

Among the discovered compounds were hydrogen iodide HI, hypoiodous acid HIO,
iodous acid HIO2 and iodic acid HIO3. These cover the oxidation states of iodine
from −I to V. The disproportionation of I2 to HI and HIO3 should therefore be
included in the CRN as HI and HIO3 were discovered starting from I2 and H2O.

3 I2 + 3 H2O −−(cid:42)(cid:41)−− HIO3 + 5 HI

(R13)

The overall reaction equation of the disproportionation starting from I2 and H2O is
given in R13. Mechanistic models for the formation of HIO3 have been discussed
in the literature. Early attempts to describe the formation focused on the dissoci-
ation of iodine 29 and proposed I2OH, ’invented ad hoc’, 28 as intermediate to react
with two equivalents of hypoiodous acid. In a more recent investigation a kinetic
model containing ten proposed reactions was ﬁtted successfully to the experimental
observations. 30 This model proposed I2OH – as intermediate to be crucial for ﬁtting
the experimental results. Iodate, IO –
3 , was proposed to be formed from two equiv-
alents of IO –
2 . As a caveat, we emphasize that our exploration was performed in
the gas phase (see 3). Hence, reactions leading to charged compounds, such as de-
protonation reactions, are too high in energy in our setting that precludes dielectric
stabilization eﬀects and are therefore not observed in this work.

We chose a kinetic model proposed in the literature 53,54 as our reference model and
slightly modiﬁed it. The kinetic reference model for the disproportionation is part
of a more complex kinetic model of the Bray–Liebhafsky reaction. 55,56 The original
kinetic model was postulated based on experimental observations and simulation
attempts. Our kinetic reference model is represented in R14 to R17. We neglected
any dissociation reactions proposed in the original kinetic model in the literature
due to the fact that solvent eﬀects were not considered in our exploration. The
proposed elementary steps for this kinetic reference model are then:

I2 + H2O −−(cid:42)(cid:41)−− HI + HIO
2 HIO −−(cid:42)(cid:41)−− I2O + H2O
I2O + H2O −−(cid:42)(cid:41)−− HIO2 + HI
HIO2 + HIO −−(cid:42)(cid:41)−− HIO3 + HI

(R14)

(R15)

(R16)

(R17)

To illustrate the operation of Pathfinder, we evaluated the literature path starting

18

from I2 and H2O (left hand side of R14) to HIO3 (right hand side of R17). This
corresponds to the disproportionation of I2. Exchanging start and end of the path
yields the comproportionation of HI and HIO3. We compare the literature path and
its length to the shortest path found by Pathfinder for both directions, shown in
Fig. 6, in the following sections. More detailed Pathfinder output on all paths is
given in the SI.

Figure 6:
Summary of paths of the disproportionation of I2 and of the compro-
portionation of HIO3 and HI. Compounds are represented as blue nodes with their
respective Lewis structure and molecular formula. Reagents and side-products are
not shown for clarity. Literature paths derived from experimental observations 53,54
for the disproportionation (D.) and the comproportionation (C.) are shown with
dark gray and dark green arrows, respectively. The Pathfinder paths for the
same start and target compound are shown with light gray and light green arrows.

4.2.1 Disproportionation of I2

An elementary step is deﬁned as a chemical reaction in which the LHS and the RHS
are connected by a single transition state. R14, R15 and R17 were found in the CRN
with elementary steps with one transition state (TS). However, R16 turned out to be
not an elementary step in our CRN, as there was not one single TS connection the
left hand side and right hand side of R16. Instead, the shortest path Pathfinder
proposed to obtain HIO2 from I2O under the given disproportionation conditions
traversed via compound H2I2O2, which has a HO−I−OH motive (compare Fig. 6).
The reactions traversed for the formation of compound HIO2 from I2O included the
highest free activation barrier along the literature path, as can be seen in Fig. 7.
The added path lengths are shown in Fig. 8. There were other possible paths with
similar lengths.

19

HHOIOOIH2I2O3HHIOOIH2I2O2HHHOOOIH3IO3H2I2O2HHIOOIIII2HIOHIOIIOI2OHOOIHIO2IOOOHHIO3D. Literature PathD. Pathﬁnder PathC. Literature PathC. Pathﬁnder PathThe total length of the reference path via the intermediate of H2I2O2 summed up to
420 a.u., as shown in Fig. 8. Overall, two equivalents of HIO were consumed along
this reference path, namely at reaction number two and ﬁve of the literature path.
As the compound cost of HIO was 75 a.u. (compare Fig. 5) under the stated starting
conditions, the total cost of the consumption of the two equivalents of HIO summed
up to 150 a.u.. The consumption of two equivalents of HIO therefore was responsible
for 36 % of the weight of the path’s total length.

Figure 7: Free energies of the reactions traversed for the shortest disproportionation
paths of I2 under consideration. For each reaction, free activation barriers are added
(up) and subtracted (down), respectively. Free activation energies are given above
the energy level of the TS of the corresponding reaction.

The shortest path found by Pathfinder diﬀered at the second reaction step from
the reference path. Instead of forming I2O and consuming one equivalent of HIO,
the path traversed via H2I2O2, which has a IO−I−OH motive (compare Fig. 6),
and H3IO3 to form iodous acid HIO2. The ﬁnal steps to iodic acid diﬀered as well,
as it was more economical to react with equivalents of the starting compounds I2
and H2O compared to HIO in the reference path. This can be seen in Fig. 8, as
the reactions ﬁve and six of the path by Pathfinder elongate the total path by
a length of 99 a.u., whereas the direct formation via reaction ﬁve of the literature
path extends the total path by a length of 111 a.u.. Hence, despite the reactions
with higher activation barriers (compare Fig. 7), the path from HIO2 to HIO3 by
Pathfinder was favorable in terms of path length because of the availability of the
required compounds and consequently the lower compound costs. The overall total
path length of the Pathfinder path was 321 a.u. and thereby about 100 a.u. lower
then for the literature path. The cost was reduced by avoiding the consumption of
two equivalents of HIO which were required in R15 and R17 of the literature path.

The interpretation of a CRN by Pathfinder depends on the choices made for the

20

123456Reaction Number0100200300400500600Rel. Free Energy [kJ/mol]I2HIOI2OH2I2O2HIO2HIO3+174.4+108.3+204.7+58.8+83.2HIOH2I2O2H3IO3HIO2H2I2O3HIO3+161.1+123.6+49.9+144.1+86.2D. Literature PathD. Pathfinder PathFigure 8: Total path length of the shortest disproportionation paths of I2 under
consideration. For each reaction, the corresponding path length via this reaction is
added and the length given.

exploration such as the underlying electronic structure theory, the modeling of the
environment (gas phase vs solvation) and the starting conditions for determining
the compound costs. Given the limitations of the performed exploration, especially
the simpliﬁcation to exclude any solvation eﬀects, the diﬀerence in the reference and
Pathfinder path are not surprising. The compounds along the Pathfinder path
must also be considered with care as some have not been observed experimentally.
However, the crucial point of considering the stoichiometric constraints for reactions
are clearly covered by the Pathfinder analysis of a CRN as the reactions of the
shortest path for the disproportionation are not consuming any reactants besides
the starting materials I2 and H2O.

4.2.2 Comproportionation of HIO3 and HI

For the comproportionation, only HIO3 and HI were considered as starting com-
pounds. HIO3 was assigned a compound cost of 1.0 a.u., HI a compound cost of
0.45 a.u.. This corresponded to a probability of 36 % (e−1.0) for HIO3 and 64 %
(e−0.45) for HI, respectively, being available at the start. As we were analyzing the
same CRN as for the disproportionation, the same reactions as discussed before
were present. However, a path to form I2O from HIO2 was still needed as R16 is
not an elementary step in our network. Due to the diﬀerent starting conditions, the
shortest path to form HIO2 varied from the one found under the disproportionation
conditions. Pathfinder identiﬁed a direct formation of I2O from the reaction of
HIO2 with two equivalents of HIO as the shortest option. The steps found and
discussed under disproportionation conditions for R16 were the second best option,

21

123456Reaction Number0100200300400Total Path Length [a.u.]I2HIOI2OH2I2O2HIO2HIO3+73+121+86+26+111HIOH2I2O2H3IO3HIO2H2I2O3HIO3+69+53+23+62+37D. Literature PathD. Pathfinder Pathonly 0.1 a.u. more expensive.
With the starting conditions set for the comproportionation, the resulting compound
cost for HIO was 17 a.u. instead of the 74 a.u. determined under the disproportiona-
tion conditions. This illustrates the dependency of the determined compound costs
on the chosen starting conditions. The easier formation of HIO was due to the
lower reaction barrier of 30.9 kJ/mol from HIO3 to HIO2 (compare R17), as shown
in Fig. 9, compared to the barrier of 174.4 kJ/mol from I2 to HIO (compare R14).
The highest reaction barrier in the literature path was the formation of HIO from
I2O, reaction three of the path, corresponding to R15. The overall cost of this refer-
ence path accumulated to 159 a.u. with reaction three of this path elongating it by
67 a.u..

Figure 9: Free energies of the reactions traversed for the comproportionation paths
of HIO3 and HI under consideration. For each reaction, free activation barriers are
added (up) and subtracted (down), respectively. Free activation energies are given
above the energy level of the TS of the corresponding reaction.

Finding the shortest path to iodine under the given starting conditions according
to Pathfinder required only two reactions, as shown in Fig. 9 and Fig. 10. First,
compound H2I2O3 (compare Fig. 6) was formed from HIO3 and HI. This interme-
diate then reacted again with one equivalent of HI, a cheap starting compound, to
form I2. The overall length of this path was 24.7 a.u., more than 100 a.u. lower than
the literature path. The key feature distinguishing it from the reference path was
that only starting compounds were consumed.

As the reference model was based on experimental studies of the disproportionation,
its validity for the comproportionation reaction has to be carefully considered. The
fact that the shortest path according to Pathfinder was not overlapping with the
literature path indicated that there might be other steps involved. Pathfinder
allows for an almost unbiased approach, with the exception of the choice of the

22

1234Reaction Number200150100500Rel. Free Energy [kJ/mol]HIO3HIO2I2OHIOI2+30.9+46.1+119.8+39.9HIO3H2I2O3I2+19.2+24.2C. Literature PathC. Pathfinder PathFigure 10: Total path length of the shortest comproportionation paths of HIO3
and HI under consideration. For each reaction, the corresponding path length via
this reaction is added and the length stated.

starting conditions.

5 Conclusions

In this work, we introduced the Pathfinder algorithm for the fast and eﬃcient
analysis of general CRNs represented in a speciﬁc graph-based form. In such graphs,
kinetic weights are derived from reaction barriers obtained from quantum mechanical
reference calculations. They are linked to the likelihood of a reaction in the CRN
taking place. To consider the consumption of required reagents during a reaction,
compound costs of all compounds in the CRN are determined under given starting
conditions. When added to the kinetic weight, both the kinetic information and
the reaction conditions of a reaction are encoded in the graph. This avoids explicit
kinetic modeling of a CRN with many coupled ordinary diﬀerential equations causing
exceedingly long simulation times. Instead, the shortest path is found by standard
graph algorithms in a cost eﬃcient way. It is then directly possible to query how
compounds are formed in terms of a reaction sequence, avoiding the post-processing
of a kinetic simulation.

We ﬁrst demonstrated our algorithm at a synthetic reaction mechanism. Then, we
evaluated the disproportionation reaction of I2 with H2O. The CRN was generated
with Chemoton and Pathfinder where the latter on-the-ﬂy ranked the encoun-
tered compounds to guide the exploration by exploring only compounds with low
costs. This strategy was followed until elementary-step trials of iodic acid with the

23

1234Reaction Number020406080100120140160Total Path Length [a.u.]HIO3HIO2I2OHIOI2+16+55+67+19HIO3H2I2O3I2+11+13C. Literature PathC. Pathfinder Pathsix most probable compounds were probed. The obtained CRN was further ana-
lyzed with Pathfinder and paths for disproportionation and comproportionation
reactions were compared to paths proposed in the literature. Despite the fact that
our exploration only described gas-phase chemistry by construction, interesting ob-
servations could be made regarding potentially important neutral species in these
reactions.

We emphasize that the graph architecture allows one to analyze the graph in other
ways than those considered here. For example, running Monte-Carlo simulations
from a starting compound while at each compound node the next reaction node is
chosen according to the compound nodes’ relative out-ﬂux could help to understand
which compounds are formed. Such a procedure would better approximate a full
microkinetic modeling attempt on the network. Work along these lines is currently
in progress in our laboratory.

Acknowledgments

The authors gratefully acknowledge ﬁnancial support through ETH grant ETH-
44 20-1. This work was presented at the WATOC 2022 conference in July 2022 in
Vancouver.

References

[1] Sameera, W. M. C.; Maeda, S.; Morokuma, K. Computational Catalysis Using
the Artiﬁcial Force Induced Reaction Method. Acc. Chem. Res. 2016, 49, 763–
773.

[2] Maeda, S.; Harabuchi, Y. Exploring Paths of Chemical Transformations in
Molecular and Periodic Systems: An Approach Utilizing Force. WIREs Comput
Mol Sci 2021, 11, e1538.

[3] Dewyer, A. L.; Zimmerman, P. M. Finding Reaction Mechanisms, Intuitive or

Otherwise. Org. Biomol. Chem. 2017, 15, 501–504.

[4] Simm, G. N.; Vaucher, A. C.; Reiher, M. Exploration of Reaction Pathways and
Chemical Transformation Networks. J. Phys. Chem. A 2019, 123, 385–399.

[5] Unsleber, J. P.; Reiher, M. The Exploration of Chemical Reaction Networks.

Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 2020, 71, 121–142.

24

[6] Steiner, M.; Reiher, M. Autonomous Reaction Network Exploration in Homo-

geneous and Heterogeneous Catalysis. Top. Catal. 2022, 65, 6–39.

[7] Baiardi, A.; Grimmel, S. A.; Steiner, M.; T¨urtscher, P. L.; Unsleber, J. P.; Wey-
muth, T.; Reiher, M. Expansive Quantum Mechanical Exploration of Chemical
Reaction Paths. Acc. Chem. Res. 2022, 55, 35–43.

[8] Hoops, S.; Sahle, S.; Gauges, R.; Lee, C.; Pahle, J.; Simus, N.; Singhal, M.;
Xu, L.; Mendes, P.; Kummer, U. COPASI—a COmplex PAthway SImulator.
Bioinformatics 2006, 22, 3067–3074.

[9] Tur´anyi, T.; Tomlin, A. S. Analysis of Kinetic Reaction Mechanisms, 1st ed.;

Springer Berlin Heidelberg: Berlin, Heidelberg, 2014.

[10] Proppe, J.; Husch, T.; Simm, G. N.; Reiher, M. Uncertainty quantiﬁcation
for quantum chemical models of complex reaction networks. Faraday Discuss.
2016, 195, 497–520.

[11] Goodwin, D. G.; Speth, R. L.; Moﬀat, H. K.; Weber, B. W. Cantera: An
Object-oriented Software Toolkit for Chemical Kinetics, Thermodynamics, and
Transport Processes. Zenodo, 2018; DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.1174508.

[12] Proppe, J.; Reiher, M. Mechanism Deduction from Noisy Chemical Reaction

Networks. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2019, 15, 357–370.

[13] Habershon, S. Automated Prediction of Catalytic Mechanism and Rate Law
Using Graph-Based Reaction Path Sampling. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2016,
12, 1786–1798.

[14] Feinberg, M. Foundations of Chemical Reaction Network Theory; Applied
Mathematical Sciences; Springer International Publishing: Cham, 2019; Vol.
202; pp 419–440.

[15] Kowalik, M.; Gothard, C. M.; Drews, A. M.; Gothard, N. A.; Weckiewicz, A.;
Fuller, P. E.; Grzybowski, B. A.; Bishop, K. J. M. Parallel Optimization of
Synthetic Pathways within the Network of Organic Chemistry. Angew. Chem.
Int. Ed. 2012, 51, 7928–7932.

[16] Robertson, C.; Ismail, I.; Habershon, S. Traversing Dense Networks of Elemen-
tary Chemical Reactions to Predict Minimum-Energy Reaction Mechanisms.
ChemSystemsChem 2020, 2, e1900047.

[17] Grzybowski, B. A.; Badowski, T.; Molga, K.; Szymku´c, S. Network Search
Algorithms and Scoring Functions for Advanced-Level Computerized Synthesis
Planning. WIREs Computational Molecular Science 2022, e1630.

25

[18] Blau, S. M.; Patel, H. D.; Spotte-Smith, E. W. C.; Xie, X.; Dwaraknath, S.;
Persson, K. A. A Chemically Consistent Graph Architecture for Massive Reac-
tion Networks Applied to Solid-Electrolyte Interphase Formation. Chem. Sci.
2021, 12, 4931–4939.

[19] Xie, X.; Clark Spotte-Smith, E. W.; Wen, M.; Patel, H. D.; Blau, S. M.; Pers-
son, K. A. Data-Driven Prediction of Formation Mechanisms of Lithium Ethy-
lene Monocarbonate with an Automated Reaction Network. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
2021, 143, 13245–13258.

[20] Dijkstra, E. W. A Note on Two Problems in Connexion with Graphs. Numer.

Math. 1959, 1, 269–271.

[21] Yen, J. Y. Finding the K Shortest Loopless Paths in a Network. Management

Science 1971, 17, 712–716.

[22] McDermott, M. J.; Dwaraknath, S. S.; Persson, K. A. A Graph-Based Network
for Predicting Chemical Reaction Pathways in Solid-State Materials Synthesis.
Nat. Commun. 2021, 12, 3097.

[23] Barter, D.; Spotte-Smith, E. W. C.; Redkar, N. S.; Dwaraknath, S.;
Persson, K. A.; Blau, S. M. Predictive Stochastic Analysis of Massive
Filter-Based Electrochemical Reaction Networks. ChemRxiv 2022, DOI:
10.26434/chemrxiv-2021-c2gp3-v2.

[24] Spotte-Smith, E. W. C.; Kam, R. L.; Barter, D.; Xie, X.; Hou, T.; Dwarak-
nath, S.; Blau, S. M.; Persson, K. A. Toward a Mechanistic Model of
Solid–Electrolyte Interphase Formation and Evolution in Lithium-Ion Batter-
ies. ACS Energy Lett. 2022, 7, 1446–1453.

[25] Bergeler, M.; Simm, G. N.; Proppe, J.; Reiher, M. Heuristics-Guided Explo-
ration of Reaction Mechanisms. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2015, 11, 5712–5722.

[26] Simm, G. N.; Reiher, M. Context-Driven Exploration of Complex Chemical

Reaction Networks. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2017, 13, 6108–6119.

[27] Unsleber, J. P.; Grimmel, S. A.; Reiher, M. Chemoton 2.0: Autonomous Explo-
ration of Chemical Reaction Networks. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2022, DOI:
10.1021/acs.jctc.2c00193.

[28] Dushman, S. The Rate of the Reaction between Iodic and Hydriodic Acids. J.

Phys. Chem. 1904, 8, 453–482.

[29] Murray, H. D. CXXIII.—The Hydrolysis of Iodine as Measured by the Iodine

Electrode. J. Chem. Soc., Trans. 1925, 127, 882–885.

26

[30] Seb˝ok-Nagy, K.; K¨ortv´elyesi, T. Kinetics and Mechanism of the Hydrolytic

Disproportionation of Iodine. Int. J. Chem. Kinet. 2004, 36, 596–602.

[31] Truesdale, V. W.; Luther, G. W.; Greenwood, J. E. The Kinetics of Iodine
Disproportionation: A System of Parallel Second-Order Reactions Sustained
by a Multi-Species Pre-Equilibrium. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2003, 5, 3428–
3435.

[32] Hagberg, A. A.; Schult, D. A.; Swart, P. J. Exploring Network Structure, Dy-
namics, and Function Using NetworkX. Proceedings of the 7th Python in Sci-
ence Conference (SciPy2008). Pasadena, CA USA, 2008.

[33] Bensberg, M.; Grimmel, S. A.; Simm, G. N.; Sobez, J.-G.; Steiner, M.;
T¨urtscher, P. L.; Unsleber, J. P.; Weymuth, T.; Reiher, M. Qcscine/Chemoton:
Release 2.0.0. Zenodo, 2022; DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.6695584.

[34] Bensberg, M.; Brandino, G. P.; Can, Y.; Del, M.; Grimmel, S. A.; Mesiti, M.;
M¨uller, C. H.; Steiner, M.; T¨urtscher, P. L.; Unsleber, J. P.; Weberndorfer, M.;
Weymuth, T.; Reiher, M. Qcscine/Heron: Release 1.0.0. Zenodo, 2022; DOI:
10.5281/zenodo.7038388.

[35] Bensberg, M.; Grimmel, S. A.; Simm, G. N.; Sobez, J.-G.; Steiner, M.;
T¨urtscher, P. L.; Unsleber, J. P.; Weymuth, T.; Reiher, M. Qcscine/Chemoton:
Release. Zenodo, 2022; DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.6695583.

[36] Bensberg, M.; Brandino, G. P.; Can, Y.; Del, M.; Grimmel, S. A.; Mesiti, M.;
M¨uller, C. H.; Steiner, M.; T¨urtscher, P. L.; Unsleber, J. P.; Weberndor-
fer, M.; Weymuth, T.; Reiher, M. Qcscine/Heron: Release. Zenodo, 2022; DOI:
10.5281/zenodo.7038387.

[37] SCINE. https://scine.ethz.ch, (accessed 2022-05-06).

[38] Bensberg, M.; Grimmel, S. A.; Sobez, J.-G.; Steiner, M.; Unsleber, J. P.; Rei-
her, M. Qcscine/Database: Release 1.0.0. Zenodo, 2022; DOI: 10.5281/zen-
odo.6695496.

[39] Bensberg, M.; Brunken, C.; Csizi, K.-S.; Grimmel, S. A.; Gugler, S.; Sobez, J.-
G.; Steiner, M.; T¨urtscher, P. L.; Unsleber, J. P.; Weymuth, T.; Reiher, M.
Qcscine/Puﬃn: Release 1.0.0. Zenodo, 2022; DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.6695462.

[40] Vaucher, A. C.; Reiher, M. Minimum Energy Paths and Transition States by

Curve Optimization. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2018, 14, 3091–3099.

[41] Brunken, C.; Csizi, K.-S.; Grimmel, S. A.; Gugler, S.; Sobez, J.-G.; Steiner, M.;
T¨urtscher, P. L.; Unsleber, J. P.; Vaucher, A. C.; Weymuth, T.; Reiher, M.
qcscine/Readuct: Release 3.0.0. Zenodo, 2021; DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.5782849.

27

[42] Sobez, J.-G.; Reiher, M. Molassembler: Molecular Graph Construction, Mod-
iﬁcation, and Conformer Generation for Inorganic and Organic Molecules. J.
Chem. Inf. Model. 2020, 60, 3884–3900.

[43] Sobez, J.-G.; Reiher, M. qcscine/Molassembler: Release 1.1.0. Zenodo, 2021;

DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.5782843.

[44] Bosia, F.; Brunken, C.; Csizi, K.-S.; Grimmel, S. A.; Gugler, S.; Haag, M. P.;
Heuer, M. A.; M¨uller, C. H.; Polonius, S.; Simm, G. N.; Sobez, J.-G.;
Steiner, M.; T¨urtscher, P. L.; Unsleber, J. P.; Vaucher, A. C.; Weymuth, T.; Rei-
her, M. qcscine/Utilities: Release 4.0.0. 2021, DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.5782808.

[45] TURBOMOLE V7.4.1 2019, a development of University of Karlsruhe and
Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe GmbH, 1989-2007, TURBOMOLE GmbH, since
2007; available from https://www.turbomole.com. (accessed 2022-05-06).

[46] Perdew, J. P.; Wang, Y. Accurate and Simple Analytic Representation of the
Electron-Gas Correlation Energy. Phys. Rev. B 1992, 45, 13244–13249.

[47] Perdew, J. P.; Burke, K.; Ernzerhof, M. Generalized Gradient Approximation

Made Simple. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1996, 77, 3865–3868.

[48] Peterson, K. A.; Figgen, D.; Goll, E.; Stoll, H.; Dolg, M. Systematically conver-
gent basis sets with relativistic pseudopotentials. II. Small-core pseudopoten-
tials and correlation consistent basis sets for the post-d group 16-18 elements.
J. Chem. Phys. 2003, 119, 11113–11123.

[49] Weigend, F.; Ahlrichs, R. Balanced basis sets of split valence, triple zeta valence
and quadruple zeta valence quality for H to Rn: Design and assessment of
accuracy. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2005, 7, 3297.

[50] Rappoport, D.; Furche, F. Property-optimized Gaussian basis sets for molecular

response calculations. J. Chem. Phys. 2010, 133, 134105.

[51] Grimme, S.; Antony, J.; Ehrlich, S.; Krieg, H. A Consistent and Accurate Ab
Initio Parametrization of Density Functional Dispersion Correction (DFT-D)
for the 94 Elements H-Pu. J. Chem. Phys. 2010, 132, 154104.

[52] Wiberg, N.; Wiberg, E.; Holleman, A. F. In Anorganische Chemie Band 1
Grundlagen und Hauptgruppenelemente, 103rd ed.; Holleman, A. F., Ed.; De
Gruyter: Berlin/Boston, 2016; pp 525–529, DOI: 10.1515/9783110495850-014.

[53] Schmitz, G. Cin´etique de la r´eaction de Bray. J. Chim. Phys. 1987, 84, 957–

965.

28

[54] Kolar-Ani´c, L.; Misljenovi´c, D.; Ani´c, S.; Nicolis, G. Inﬂuence of the Reduc-
tion of Iodate Ion by Hydrogen Peroxide on the Model of the Bray-Liebhafsky
Reaction. React. Kinet. Catal. Lett. 1995, 54, 35–41.

[55] Bray, W. C.; Liebhafsky, H. A. Reactions Involving Hydrogen Peroxide, Iodine

and Iodate Ion. I. Introduction. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1931, 53, 38–44.

[56] Liebhafsky, H. A. Reactions Involving Hydrogen Peroxide, Iodine and Iodate
Ion. III. The Reduction of Iodate Ion by Hydrogen Peroxide. J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 1931, 53, 896–911.

29

