GRAVITY faint: reducing noise sources in GRAVITY+ with
a fast metrology attenuation system

Felix Widmann1, Stefan Gillessen1, Thomas Ott1, Taro Shimizu1, Frank Eisenhauer1,
Maximilian Fabricius1, Julien Woillez8, Frederic Gont´e8, Matthew Horrobin4, Jingyi
Shangguan1, Senol Yazici1, Guy Perrin2, Thibaut Paumard2, Wolfgang Brandner3, Laura
Kreidberg3, Christian Straubmeier4, Karine Perraut5, Jean-Baptiste Le Bouquin5, Paulo
Garcia6,7, Sebastian H¨onig9, Denis Defr`ere10, Guillaume Bourdarot1, Antonia Drescher1,
Helmut Feuchtgruber1, Reinhard Genzel1, Michael Hartl1, Dieter Lutz1, Nikhil More1,
Christian Rau1, Sinem Uysal1, Ekkehard Wieprecht1, and GRAVITY+ Collaboration1

1Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Extraterrestrische Physik (MPE), Gießenbachstraße, Garching bei
M¨unchen, Germany
2LESIA, Observatoire de Paris, PSL Research University, CNRS, Sorbonne Universit´es, UPMC
Univ. Paris 06, Univ. Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cit´e, 92195 Meudon Cedex, France
3Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Astronomie, K¨onigstuhl 17, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany
41. Physikalisches Institut, Universit¨at zu K¨oln, Z¨ulpicher Str. 77, 50937 K¨oln, Germany
5Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, IPAG, 38000 Grenoble, France
6CENTRA and Universidade de Lisboa - Faculdade de Ciencias, Campo Grande, 1749-016
Lisboa, Portugal
7Faculdade de Engenharia, Universidade do Porto, rua Dr. Roberto Frias, 4200-465 Porto,
Portugal
8European Southern Observatory, Karl-Schwarzschild-Str. 2, 85748 Garching, Germany
9School of Physics & Astronomy, University of Southampton, Southampton, SO17 1BJ, UK
10Institute of Astronomy, KU Leuven, Celestijnenlaan 200D, B-3001, Leuven, Belgium

ABSTRACT

With the upgrade from GRAVITY to GRAVITY+ the instrument will evolve to an all-sky interferometer that
can observe faint targets, such as high redshift AGN. Observing the faintest targets requires reducing the noise
sources in GRAVITY as much as possible. The dominant noise source, especially in the blue part of the spectrum,
is the backscattering of the metrology laser light onto the detector. To reduce this noise we introduce two new
metrology modes. With a combination of small hardware changes and software adaptations, we can dim the
metrology laser during the observation without losing the phase referencing. For single beam targets, we can even
turn oﬀ the metrology laser for the maximum SNR on the detector. These changes lead to a SNR improvement
of over a factor of two averaged over the whole spectrum and up to a factor of eight in the part of the spectrum
currently dominated by laser noise.

Keywords: interferometry, near-infrared, noise-suppression, VLTI, GRAVITY+

1. INTRODUCTION

Since the ﬁrst light of GRAVITY in 2016,1 GRAVITY and the VLTI have transformed optical interferometry
with groundbreaking results in many diﬀerent science areas. With the recent success comes an increased demand
for optical interferometry and the wish to push the limits of what is observable even further. This is exactly the
goal of the project GRAVITY+. GRAVITY+ aims to improve GRAVITY and the existing VLTI infrastructure

Further author information:
F.Widmann.: E-mail: fwidmann@mpe.mpg.de

2
2
0
2

p
e
S
2
1

]

M

I
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
3
9
5
5
0
.
9
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Schematic overview of the metrology system used by GRAVITY. On the right, GRAVITY is shown with the
metrology beam split up into the two low power beam which are fed into the two ﬁber couplers and the high power beam
which is fed into the system after the ﬁber couplers. The signal is then measured in the telescope (shown on the left)
with four metrology diodes, which are mounted on the telescope spiders. For simplicity only one telescope is shown, and
many optical elements (such as the delay lines) are not shown.

to transform GRAVITY into an all-sky interferometer with increased sensitivity.2 The upgrades involved in
GRAVITY+ are implemented in a phased approach and several improvements have already been completed. This
includes a replacement of the grisms inside GRAVITY to improve the throughput,3 as well as the implementation
of wide ﬁeld fringe tracking, i.e. GRAVITY-Wide.4 Other parts of the project, such as a completely new AO
system with laser guide stars for all VLTI UTs and improved vibration control, are currently under development.
With the goal of creating a more sensitive GRAVITY instrument comes also the task to eliminate existing noise
sources as much as possible. One of these noise sources is the backscattering of the metrology laser, which
completely dominates the noise in the blue part of the science spectrum. The goal of the project presented here,
which is called GRAVITY-faint, is to develop an observing mode in which we can minimize the noise from the
laser without losing the functionality of the metrology system.

2. THE GRAVITY METROLOGY SYSTEM

GRAVITY oﬀers the possibility to measure precise distances between two objects in the dual-ﬁeld mode.1 In
this mode one object is the fringe tracking (FT) star, and one is the science (SC) target. The astrometry is done
by measuring the diﬀerential optical path diﬀerence (dOPD) between the two targets. To measure this dOPD,
one has to ensure that the internal dOPD between the two beams in the interferometer is well known. Measuring
the instrumental dOPD is the task of the GRAVITY metrology system.5 The metrology system consists of three
beams from the same laser, which are propagated backwards through the light-path of GRAVITY and the VLTI.
By splitting up one laser one ensures ﬁxed phase-relations between the three beams. Two beams with low laser
power are fed into both of the GRAVITY beam combiners (one for the FT and one for the SC beam). The third
beam, which has a signiﬁcantly higher laser power, is fed into the system after the ﬁber coupler. This beam is
referred to as the carrier beam. For a schematic overview of the system, see Figure 1.

GRAVITY uses this three-beam scheme to avoid feeding the high power beam through any ﬁber optics and,
therefore, to minimize the noise of the metrology laser in the science spectrum. While the laser’s wavelength,
1908 nm, is outside the wavelength range of the science spectrum (2000 nm to 2500 nm), Raman scattering and

Figure 2. Measured intensity on a 10 s dark frame in medium resolution with an indication for the dominant sources over
the spectrum.

ﬂuorescence were found to occur in the optical ﬁbers, which scatter the laser light into the science wavelengths.
This backscattering leads to signiﬁcant noise in the science spectrum and would completely dominate over any
science signal if the high power laser would be directly fed into the beam combiners. The backscattering happens
on rare elements in the optical ﬁbers and cannot be avoided. For a more detailed description of the problem see
Ref. 6. With the three-beam scheme the backscattering is reduced, as only the low power beams are fed into
the ﬁbers. However, it is not completely removed and is still a major noise source for GRAVITY.

After the ﬁber coupler all three beams follow the starlight backwards and are measured in the telescope with
four metrology diodes. The diodes are mounted on the spiders of each telescope and measure individually the
dOPD between the carrier beam and each of the FT and SC beams. The measurement is done with photodiodes
and the three beams are disentangled by phase-shifting each of them with a characteristic frequency. The dOPD
is measured by comparing the FT-carrier and the SC-carrier measurement. The carrier is not needed for the
ﬁnal measurement but is used to amplify the signal from the two faint beams.

With this system, the metrology traces all the optical paths from GRAVITY back to the primary mirror of
the telescopes. The measurement above the M1 is performed in the pupil plane, which sets the narrow angle
baseline for astrometric measurements.7

Another function of the metrology is to control motion inside the GRAVITY instrument. For this, there is
another metrology diode in the beam combiner, which measures the same signal as the telescope diodes. However,
this so-called ﬁber coupler (FC) diode has a much higher SNR.8 The dOPD measurement from the FC diode is
used to control the movement of the ﬁbered diﬀerential delay lines (FDDLs) in GRAVITY, which corrects for
the dOPD between the two targets in dual-ﬁeld observing mode introduced by the sky motion. As the FDDLs
are operated in closed loop with the FC metrology signal, this has to be considered when changing to diﬀerent
metrology modes.

3. NOISE ANALYSIS

The noise on the SC detector of GRAVITY has several diﬀerent contributions. The normal detector readout
noise and the dark current are comparably low. The GRAVITY science detector is a HAWAII2RG with a
double correlated read noise of approximately 11 electrons. This is consistent with the expected behaviour of
the detector.9 The noise sources which dominate over the detector noise are from photon noise. This has mainly
two components: ﬁrstly the thermal background from the telescope and VLTI optical train, and secondly the
backscattering of the metrology laser.10 The laser itself has again several components. There is the main broad

Figure 3. Cut out from the detector image of a dark frame in all three modes. Top: metrology on, where clear backscat-
tering can be seen in left part of the spectra. Middle: metrology faint, with only a small peak from the carrier laser
remaining. Bottom: metrology oﬀ, no spectra visible anymore. The white rectangle in all plots shows a typical extraction
region for a spectrum.

backscattering which occurs mostly from 2.0 µm to 2.1 µm. This is caused by the SC and FT metrology beam in
the optical ﬁber. Additionally we have backscattering of the carrier beam, which causes a peak at wavelengths
below 2.0 µm as well as a diﬀuse background over the full detector, originating from the metrology injection in
the spectrometer. The diﬀuse background has a signal of about one electron per pixel and second, while the
backscattering below 2.1 µm is on the order of tens of electrons per pixel and second, depending on the observing
mode used. For an example of the measured intensity on a typical dark exposure see Figure 2. The metrology
laser is therefore clearly the dominating noise source with an approximate intensity of 30 electrons per second
and a noise of up to six electrons per second. Observations of faint targets would beneﬁt greatly from removing
this noise source.

4. THE NEW METROLOGY MODES

To remove metrology laser noise we made a small hardware adjustment to the metrology system of GRAVITY.
After the splitting of the metrology laser we added optical attenuators to the SC and FT beam. The attenuators
allow us to damp the laser power in the SC and FT beam by applying a voltage to them. The carrier laser stays
untouched. However, we implemented a new possibility to shut oﬀ the laser ampliﬁer, which eﬀectively shuts oﬀ
the metrology laser completely. With these new additions we can now use the laser metrology system in three
diﬀerent modes:

• ON: The laser metrology is used as before

• FAINT: The SC and FT are damped during a science exposure to reduce noise on the detector

• OFF: The laser is shut oﬀ completely to fully remove the metrology noise

To illustrate the impact Figure 3 shows the detector image for a dark frame in the three modes. On the GRAVITY
SC detector the wavelength axis is on the x-axis. The spectra from the diﬀerent baselines and polarizations are
projected with a shift in y-direction leading to 48 spectra visible as horizontal lines. In Figure 3 we show a cut-out
of the detector which includes four spectra. The top plot with metrology ON shows signiﬁcant backscattering,
which then reduces for GRAVITY FAINT. In FAINT the only metrology light left is the very sharp peak at the

Figure 4. Measured intensity on a 10 s dark frame for diﬀerent voltages applied to the optical attenuators. The voltage
ranges from 0 V (no damping) to 5 V (fully damped). The left plot shows the measured intensity and the right plot the
noise over 10 DITs, estimated by the standard deviation.

Figure 5. Schematic of the FAINT observing mode, which shows the necessary changes that are introduced for this mode.

bluest part of the spectrum, which is from the carrier shining back into the ﬁber coupler (see for comparison
Figure 2). In the bottom plot in Figure 3 this is then completely gone, as also the carrier is turned oﬀ in the
metrology OFF mode.

Depending on the science goals of the observation and the expected brightness of the target a diﬀerent mode

should be used. The two new modes are described in the following.

4.1 Metrology FAINT

In the FAINT mode, the main idea is to have the metrology measurement with ideal SNR only in between expo-
sures. This is done by using the attenuators to dampen the metrology signal during the exposure. The remaining
intensity on a typical dark frame with diﬀerent damper voltages is shown in Figure 4. The backscattering, which
is the dominant noise source, is removed by damping the light. The scattered light from the laser injection is
also reduced with increasing voltage. Due to the bias removal in the reduction of the dark frames this is hardly
visible in the measured intensity. However, the right plot in Figure 4 shows a clear noise improvement over the
full spectrometer. For the fully dampened laser only the sharp peak below 2 µm, which comes from reﬂections
of the carrier laser, as well as the thermal background, are visible.

To keep the basic functionality of the metrology system, we damp down the metrology signal to only about
90 %, which corresponds to a voltage of 3.2 V. This allows us to always have a continuous metrology signal

Figure 6. Metrology signal in GRAVITY-faint. The grey dots show the metrology measurement as it is used in normal
mode. The red data show the same measurement with increased smoothing. The grey areas in the background indicate
times in which the metrology was bright.

by using a longer averaging of the measurement. Additionally, we need to use a lower gain for the control
loop of the FDDLs, as it relies on the metrology measurement. In this setup with the dimmed metrology, the
longer averaging, and the lower gain on the FDDLs, we keep the stability of the instrument with a signiﬁcantly
improved SNR on the detector. Additionally, there is a wait time of 1 s introduced in between exposures. In this
1 s the metrology laser is brought to the original brightness by removing the voltage from the attenuators and
the normal averaging and gain factors are used. This allows the FDDLs to move to their nominal position in case
they would show small deviations from it. The last change is, that we introduce a short ignore time around the
changes of the attenuator, where the metrology signal is simply ignored. This avoids a wrong measurement in
the case that the change in voltage at the attenuators introduces a phase error. The changes and the observing
principle is schematically shown in Figure 5.

Similar to the real-time code we also introduce a longer averaging in the data reduction software, which then
results in the metrology signal at a nominal SNR. The metrology signal for one exposure and one telescope is
shown in Figure 6, where we show that we can get the high SNR metrology measurement back by introducing a
longer averaging.

To show the stability of the metrology system in faint mode, we observed a binary target during the commis-
sioning. This target was observed in normal dual-ﬁeld mode, where one star is the FT target and the other one
the SC. The resulting SC visibility phases are shown in Figure 7. The phases are calibrated with the expected
phase center of the SC target, so they should be zero for a single source. The four exposures in Figure 7 do
indeed show phases of around zero, the small scatter comes from noise and aberration in the instrument. The
right plot in Figure 7 shows the ﬁtted position of the SC star, which is again roughly consistent with zero and
shows an expected scatter. This is so far only a very ﬁrst test, as we need to further optimize the new parameters
of the system and run longer tests to assess the stability, but the ﬁrst results look promising.

Figure 7. First test of an astrometric measurement with GRAVITY-faint. The left plots show the visibility phase over 4
exposures of 2 min each, with the average phase as a bold line and the phase per DIT shaded out. The right plot shows
the astrometry of the four ﬁles, relative to the calibrated phase center.

Figure 8. Group delay measurement for a star pair with metrology on (red) and metrology oﬀ (black).

Figure 9. Comparison of the detector noise in the three diﬀerent metrology mode. The noise is measured on dark frames
with 30 s integration.

4.2 Metrology OFF

The metrology measurement is crucial to allow dual-ﬁeld astrometry with GRAVITY. However, many science
cases of GRAVITY are based on single beam measurements and therefore do not depend on metrology measure-
ments. So far the metrology noise was not a big issue in single beam cases, as for those observations usually, the
FT star is the same as the SC star, which sets a limit of roughly 10 mag to observations with the UTs. For such
bright targets, the photon noise from the target dominates over all other noise sources.

With the implementation of GRAVITY-Wide4 as part of GRAVITY+ the number of targets with the possi-
bility of oﬀ-axis fringe tracking signiﬁcantly increases, which opens up observations of many faint science targets.
For these targets, it is therefore also interesting to suppress the metrology noise.

For faint targets, we introduce a second new mode which is the metrology OFF mode. In this mode, the
metrology laser is completely turned oﬀ by removing the power from the laser ampliﬁer. This happens during
the acquisition and the laser stays permanently turned oﬀ. This means that not only the SC and FT laser are
shut oﬀ, but also the carrier beam. Therefore, the full laser noise including the sharp carrier peak as well as the
diﬀuse backscattering over the full detector vanishes.

For targets that do not depend on dual-ﬁeld astrometry, the main purpose of the metrology signal is to keep
the instrument in a stable state and avoid drifts in the OPD. From tests in the commissioning of GRAVITY-Wide,
we could demonstrate that the instrument is indeed stable without the metrology feedback. For these tests, we
observed a star pair in GRAVITY-Wide in both metrology ON and OFF. In Figure 8 the group delay of the
two measurements is shown and there is no visible drift in the group delay of the metrology OFF measurement,
which shows that the instrument is indeed stable. The data in Figure 8 spans only over 15 min. We took much
more data in metrology OFF mode, for example, the observation of a QSO at redshift z=2 in Ref. 4 was taken
with metrology OFF and showed a stable instrument over timescales of hours.

4.3 Remaining noise

With the two new modes, we could signiﬁcantly improve the noise introduced by the metrology system in
GRAVITY. An overview of the remaining noise proﬁle in a typical dark frame is shown in Figure 9. We have the
clearest improvement in metrology OFF mode, where the dominating noise terms are now the detector noise as
well as the thermal emission from the telescope and VLTI optical train. The noise decreases by a factor of eight

in the blue part of the spectrum (from 2.0 µm to 2.1 µm) and on average by a factor of 2.5. The improvement in
the FAINT mode is slightly lower, as the metrology carrier beam which is responsible for the noise at the lowest
wavelengths stays untouched in this mode. Nevertheless, also the FAINT mode shows signiﬁcant improvement
while still allowing for phase-referenced dual-ﬁeld observations.

5. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we present our work to suppress the noise from the metrology laser in GRAVITY, which is part
of the GRAVITY+ project. We can clearly demonstrate the improvements with the two new modes, which will
ultimately allow getting the best possible SNR for faint targets with GRAVITY+. With the FAINT mode, we
achieve this while still keeping the metrology signal and allowing for fully phase-referenced dual-ﬁeld observations.
This mode is coming close to its completion and will be oﬀered for observations with GRAVITY in the future.
The second mode is the metrology OFF mode which will give the best possible SNR for science cases that do
not rely on dual-ﬁeld metrology measurements. This mode is already available now and was successfully used
for the ﬁrst science demonstrations of the GRAVITY-Wide mode.4

REFERENCES
[1] Gravity Collaboration, Abuter, R., Accardo, M., Amorim, A., Anugu, N., ´Avila, G., Azouaoui, N., Benisty,
M., Berger, J. P., Blind, N., Bonnet, H., Bourget, P., Brandner, W., Brast, R., Buron, A., Burtscher, L.,
Cassaing, F., Chapron, F., Choquet, ´E., Cl´enet, Y., Collin, C., Coud´e Du Foresto, V., de Wit, W., de
Zeeuw, P. T., Deen, C., Delplancke-Str¨obele, F., Dembet, R., Derie, F., Dexter, J., Duvert, G., Ebert, M.,
Eckart, A., Eisenhauer, F., Esselborn, M., F´edou, P., Finger, G., Garcia, P., Garcia Dabo, C. E., Garcia
Lopez, R., Gendron, E., Genzel, R., Gillessen, S., Gonte, F., Gordo, P., Grould, M., Gr¨ozinger, U., Guieu,
S., Haguenauer, P., Hans, O., Haubois, X., Haug, M., Haussmann, F., Henning, T., Hippler, S., Horrobin,
M., Huber, A., Hubert, Z., Hubin, N., Hummel, C. A., Jakob, G., Janssen, A., Jochum, L., Jocou, L.,
Kaufer, A., Kellner, S., Kendrew, S., Kern, L., Kervella, P., Kiekebusch, M., Klein, R., Kok, Y., Kolb, J.,
Kulas, M., Lacour, S., Lapeyr`ere, V., Lazareﬀ, B., Le Bouquin, J. B., L`ena, P., Lenzen, R., L´evˆeque, S.,
Lippa, M., Magnard, Y., Mehrgan, L., Mellein, M., M´erand, A., Moreno-Ventas, J., Moulin, T., M¨uller,
E., M¨uller, F., Neumann, U., Oberti, S., Ott, T., Pallanca, L., Panduro, J., Pasquini, L., Paumard, T.,
Percheron, I., Perraut, K., Perrin, G., Pﬂ¨uger, A., Pfuhl, O., Phan Duc, T., Plewa, P. M., Popovic, D.,
Rabien, S., Ram´ırez, A., Ramos, J., Rau, C., Riquelme, M., Rohloﬀ, R. R., Rousset, G., Sanchez-Bermudez,
J., Scheithauer, S., Sch¨oller, M., Schuhler, N., Spyromilio, J., Straubmeier, C., Sturm, E., Suarez, M.,
Tristram, K. R. W., Ventura, N., Vincent, F., Waisberg, I., Wank, I., Weber, J., Wieprecht, E., Wiest,
M., Wiezorrek, E., Wittkowski, M., Woillez, J., Wolﬀ, B., Yazici, S., Ziegler, D., and Zins, G., “First
light for GRAVITY: Phase referencing optical interferometry for the Very Large Telescope Interferometer,”
Astronomy and Astrophysics 602, A94 (June 2017).

[2] Eisenhauer, F., “GRAVITY+: Towards faint science,” in [The Very Large Telescope in 2030], 30 (July

2019).

[3] Yazici, S., Sukegawa, T., Mayer, M., Eisenhauer, F., Okura, Y., Perraut, K., Jocou, L., Gillessen, S.,
Haussmann, F., Buron, A., Huber, D., Barl, L., Kravchenko, K., Pfuhl, O., Lacour, S., Lapeyrere, V.,
Wiezorrek, E., Ott, T., Paumard, T., Shangguan, J., Gao, F., Straubmeier, C., Guajardo, P., Riquelme,
M., Pallanca, L., Genzel, R., de Zeeuw, T., Baub¨ock, M., Habibi, M., Rau, C., Rosales, A. J., Stadler, J.,
Straub, O., Sturm, E., von Fellenberg, S., Widmann, F., Wieprecht, E., Eckart, A., Perrin, G., Amorim, A.,
Garcia, P., and Brandner, W., “GRAVITY upgrade with high-performance grisms with factor ¿2 enhanced
throughput,” in [Optical and Infrared Interferometry and Imaging VII], Tuthill, P. G., M´erand, A., and
Sallum, S., eds., 11446, 493 – 520, International Society for Optics and Photonics, SPIE (2021).

[4] GRAVITY+ Collaboration, :, Abuter, R., Allouche, F., Amorim, A., Bailet, C., Baub¨ock, M., Berger, J. P.,
Berio, P., Bigioli, A., Boebion, O., Bolzer, M. L., Bonnet, H., Bourdarot, G., Bourget, P., Brandner, W.,
Cl´enet, Y., Courtney-Barrer, B., Dallilar, Y., Davies, R., Defr`ere, D., Delboulb´e, A., Delplancke, F., Dembet,
R., de Zeeuw, P. T., Drescher, A., Eckart, A., ´Edouard, C., Eisenhauer, F., Fabricius, M., Feuchtgruber,
H., Finger, G., F¨orster Schreiber, N. M., Garcia, E., Garcia, P., Gao, F., Gendron, E., Genzel, R., Gil,
J. P., Gillessen, S., Gomes, T., Gont´e, F., Gouvret, C., Guajardo, P., Guieu, S., Hartl, M., Haubois, X.,

Haußmann, F., Heißel, G., Henning, T., Hippler, S., H¨onig, S., Horrobin, M., Hubin, N., Jacqmart, E.,
Jochum, L., Jocou, L., Kaufer, A., Kervella, P., Korhonen, H., Kreidberg, L., Lacour, S., Lagarde, S., Lai,
O., Lapeyr`ere, V., Laugier, R., Le Bouquin, J. B., Leftley, J., L´ena, P., Lutz, D., Mang, F., Marcotto, A.,
Maurel, D., M´erand, A., Millour, F., More, N., Nowacki, H., Nowak, M., Oberti, S., Ott, T., Pallanca, L.,
Paumard, T., Perraut, K., Perrin, G., Petrov, R., Pfuhl, O., Pourr´e, N., Rabien, S., Rau, C., Robbe, S.,
Rochat, S., Salman, M., Sch¨oller, M., Schubert, J., Schuhler, N., Shangguan, J., Shimizu, T., Scheithauer,
S., Sevin, A., Soulez, F., Spang, A., Stadler, E., Stadler, J., Straubmeier, C., Sturm, E., Tacconi, L. J.,
Tristram, K. R. W., Vincent, F., von Fellenberg, S., Uysal, S., Widmann, F., Wieprecht, E., Wiezorrek, E.,
Woillez, J., Yazici, S., Young, A., and Zins, G., “First Light for GRAVITY Wide: Large Separation Fringe
Tracking for the Very Large Telescope Interferometer,” arXiv e-prints , arXiv:2206.00684 (June 2022).
[5] Lippa, M., Blind, N., Gillessen, S., Kok, Y., Weber, J., Eisenhauer, F., Pfuhl, O., Janssen, A., Haug,
M., Haußmann, F., Kellner, S., Hans, O., Wieprecht, E., Ott, T., Burtscher, L., Genzel, R., Sturm, E.,
Hofmann, R., Huber, S., Huber, D., Senftleben, S., Pﬂ¨uger, A., Greßmann, R., Perrin, G., Perraut, K.,
Brandner, W., Straubmeier, C., Amorim, A., and Sch¨oller, M., “The GRAVITY metrology system: narrow-
angle astrometry via phase-shifting interferometry,” in [Optical and Infrared Interferometry IV], Rajagopal,
J. K., Creech-Eakman, M. J., and Malbet, F., eds., Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers
(SPIE) Conference Series 9146, 914622 (July 2014).

[6] Lippa, M., Gillessen, S., Blind, N., Kok, Y., Perraut, K., Jocou, L., Eisenhauer, F., Pfuhl, O., Haug,
M., Kellner, S., Haußmann, F., Plattner, M., Rau, C., Hans, O., Wieprecht, E., Ott, T., Wiezorrek, E.,
Sturm, E., Buron, A., Lacour, S., Genzel, R., Perrin, G., Brandner, W., Straubmeier, C., and Amorim, A.,
“Learnings from the use of ﬁber optics in GRAVITY,” in [Optical and Infrared Interferometry and Imaging
VI], Creech-Eakman, M. J., Tuthill, P. G., and M´erand, A., eds., Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation
Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series 10701, 107011Y (July 2018).

[7] Lacour, S., Eisenhauer, F., Gillessen, S., Pfuhl, O., Woillez, J., Bonnet, H., Perrin, G., Lazareﬀ, B., Ra-
bien, S., Lapeyr`ere, V., Cl´enet, Y., Kervella, P., and Kok, Y., “Reaching micro-arcsecond astrometry with
long baseline optical interferometry. Application to the GRAVITY instrument,” Astronomy and Astro-
physics 567, A75 (July 2014).

[8] Pfuhl, O., Haug, M., Eisenhauer, F., Kellner, S., Haussmann, F., Perrin, G., Gillessen, S., Straubmeier,
C., Ott, T., Rousselet-Perraut, K., Amorim, A., Lippa, M., Janssen, A., Brandner, W., Kok, Y., Blind,
N., Burtscher, L., Sturm, E., Wieprecht, E., Schoeller, M., Weber, J., Hans, O., and Huber, S., “The
ﬁber coupler and beam stabilization system of the GRAVITY interferometer,” in [Optical and Infrared
Interferometry IV], Rajagopal, J. K., Creech-Eakman, M. J., and Malbet, F., eds., Society of Photo-Optical
Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series 9146, 914623 (July 2014).

[9] Finger, G., Dorn, R. J., Eschbaumer, S., Hall, D. N. B., Mehrgan, L., Meyer, M., and Stegmeier, J.,
“Performance evaluation, readout modes, and calibration techniques of HgCdTe Hawaii-2RG mosaic arrays,”
in [High Energy, Optical, and Infrared Detectors for Astronomy III], Dorn, D. A. and Holland, A. D., eds.,
Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series 7021, 70210P (July 2008).
[10] Widmann, F., Eisenhauer, F., Perrin, G., Brandner, W., Straubmeier, C., Perraut, K., Amorim, A., Sch¨oller,
M., Gao, F., Genzel, R., Gillessen, S., Karl, M., Lacour, S., Lippa, M., Ott, T., Pfuhl, O., Plewa, P.,
and Waisberg, I., “Improving GRAVITY towards observations of faint targets,” in [Optical and Infrared
Interferometry and Imaging VI], Creech-Eakman, M. J., Tuthill, P. G., and M´erand, A., eds., Society of
Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series 10701, 107010K (July 2018).

