Educating Educators to Integrate Inclusive Design Across a 4-Year CS Degree Program 

Lara Letaw 

Oregon State University, letawl@oregonstate.edu 

Rosalinda Garcia 

Oregon State University, garciros@oregonstate.edu 

Patricia Morreale 

Kean University, pmorreal@kean.edu 

Gail Verdi 

Kean University, gverdi@kean.edu 

Heather Garcia 

Oregon State University, Heather.Garcia@oregonstate.edu 

Geraldine Jimena Noa 

Oregon State University, noaguevg@oregonstate.edu 

Spencer P. Madsen 

Oregon State University, spmadsen21@gmail.com 

Maria Jesus Alzugaray-Orellana 

Oregon State University, alzugarm@oregonstate.edu 

Margaret Burnett 

Oregon State University, burnett@oregonstate.edu 

How can an entire CS faculty, who together have been teaching  the ACM standard CS curricula, shift to teaching elements of inclusive design 
across a 4-year undergraduate CS program? And will they even want to try? To investigate these questions, we developed an educate-the-educators 
curriculum  to  support  this  shift.  The  overall  goal  of  the  educate-the-educators  curriculum  was  to  enable  CS  faculty  to  creatively  engage  with 
embedding inclusive design into their courses in “minimally invasive” ways. GenderMag, an inclusive design evaluation method, was selected for 
use. The curriculum targeted the following learning outcomes: to enable CS faculty: (1) to analyze the costs and benefits of integrating inclusive 
design into  their  own course(s);  (2)  to  evaluate  software  using the  GenderMag  method, and  recognize its  use to identify  meaningful  issues  in 
software; (3) to integrate inclusive design into existing course materials with provided resources and collaboration; and (4) to prepare to engage 
and guide students on learning GenderMag concepts. We conducted a field study over a spring/summer followed by end-of-fall interviews, during 
which we worked with 18 faculty members to integrate inclusive design into 13 courses. Ten of these faculty then taught 7 of these courses that 
were on the Fall 2021 schedule, across 16 sections. We present the new educate-the-educators curriculum and report on the faculty’s experiences 
acting upon it over the three-month field study and subsequent interviews. Our results showed that, of the 18 faculty we worked with, 83% chose 
to modify their courses; by Fall 2021, faculty across all four years of a CS degree program had begun teaching inclusive design concepts. When we 
followed up with the 10 Fall 2021 faculty, 91% of their reported outcomes indicated that their incorporations of inclusive design concepts into their 
courses went as well as or better than they had expected. 

CCS CONCEPTS • Human-centered computing   • Applied computing → Education  

Additional Keywords and Phrases: Inclusive Design, HCI education, Responsible CS 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1  INTRODUCTION  

Recently, several universities and individual faculty members have begun increasing course coverage of ethical dilemmas that arise 

in computing professions. Some do so by adding critical thinking to certain CS courses, some by inserting lectures on ethics into 
their courses, some by adding requirements for more stand-alone ethics courses (e.g., [7,15, 19, 21, 26, 49], and others discussed 

further in Section 2.2).  Despite these efforts, however, researchers have reported that CS students—even those who have become 
aware of these issues—are not following through to act upon their new awareness (e.g., [20]).  

We believe that addressing this problem may require a more comprehensive approach across CS degree programs and that, as 
part of the approach, students will need hands-on experiences in which they act upon ethical issues they find. Toward this end, we 

have been working on a new approach with these attributes—in which CS faculty integrate HCI inclusive design methods into 
multiple courses that gradually build students’ skills across all four years in the major, as per Figure 1. 

This  approach  requires  buy-in  and  change  by  a  sizeable  number  of  faculty,  coordination  across  the  CS  curriculum,  and 
collaboration throughout the faculty to make sure the pieces fit together well. It also requires educating faculty with a variety of 

specialties (as some faculty in other specialties are not familiar with HCI) to build students’ inclusive design skills continually over 
the four years. These requirements raise numerous challenges. Will faculty want to embark on such a project? Will those without 

HCI backgrounds be interested and be able to embed inclusive design elements into their “core CS” courses?  

In this paper, we present and evaluate an educate-the-educators curriculum to support this approach. The curriculum aims to 

not only teach CS faculty inclusive design concepts, but also teach reasons why they might want to teach those concepts to their 
students and how to smoothly embed the concepts into their courses. In support of these goals, the educate-the-educators curriculum 

aimed to make incorporating and teaching inclusive design low-cost for each faculty member and minimally-invasive into their 
courses, and to support a pathway through the  degree program by which students gradually acquired more and more  inclusive 

design skills, without experiencing repetitive content in multiple courses. We evaluated the curriculum through a three-month field 
study and subsequent end-of-fall interviews, in which we used the curriculum to teach 18 faculty. Fifteen of the faculty decided to 

include inclusive design concepts in their courses, which together spanned all four years of an undergraduate CS degree program. 

Figure 1: (Left): A pattern common in Responsible CS work. (Right): The approach we were training faculty to carry out across a 4-year 
undergraduate CS degree program. The differences (blue) from many others’ approaches to Responsible CS are: (1) faculty collaborate and 
coordinate on creating (2) gradual, coordinated content across the curriculum to (3) engage students throughout their CS program in an ethical CS 
practice (creating more inclusive software) that directly impacts their products’ users. (Note: “woke” is an informal adjective used in the US to 
mean “alert to injustice(s) in society”.)  

Our educate-the-educators curriculum has four elements: 

•  Curriculum Element #1: Getting faculty motivated: Because the success of the project would depend on a sustained and 
coordinated effort by the faculty, we employed multiple mechanisms to motivate the faculty to engage and stay engaged. 

At the end of this element, we evaluated Learning Outcome #1: analyzing the cost and benefits of the approach in their 
own context. We detail these mechanisms and evaluations in Section 4.1. 

•  Curriculum Element #2: Teaching faculty inclusive design content: For faculty to embed bits of inclusive design into core 
CS courses, they first need to understand inclusive design; in this case, the GenderMag method for inclusive design [8]. 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
We taught faculty how to do GenderMag evaluations using multiple curricular mechanisms and then evaluated Learning 
Outcome #2: evaluating software using the GenderMag method and recognize its use to identify meaningful issues in 

software. We detail these mechanisms and evaluations in Section 4.2. 

•  Curriculum Element #3: Guiding faculty through embedding inclusive design concepts into their courses: A critical piece 

would be whether faculty could and would create integrations of elements of GenderMag into their own courses. We 
scaffolded their efforts and provided example materials that some faculty at other institutions have used in individual 

courses. We then evaluated Learning Outcome #3: integrating inclusive design into their existing course materials with 
provided resources and collaboration.  We detail the mechanisms used and evaluation of the learning outcome in Section 

4.3. 

•  Curriculum Element #4: Developing faculty’s pedagogic content knowledge (PCK):  After faculty had created some of 

their changes, they began working on how to  teach the new content effectively by practicing  on each other. We also 
introduced several PCK findings for how to teach inclusive design effectively. These mechanisms contributed to Learning 

Outcome #4: preparing to engage and guide students on learning GenderMag concepts. We detail these mechanisms and 
evaluation in Section 4.4. 

The contributions of this paper therefore are: 

•  An educate-the-educators curriculum to enable faculty to embed inclusive design in a coordinated fashion across a four-

year CS program; and 

•  Results of a three-month field study and end-of-fall interviews investigating faculty’s journey starting from early interest 

in the vision shown in Figure 1 through their fall term in their own classes carrying out that vision. 

2  BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK   

2.1  Inclusive Design with GenderMag  

Our educate-the-educators curriculum leverages, as its source of inclusive design content, the GenderMag method’s components 
and foundations. GenderMag [8] is an existing method for avoiding, finding, and fixing inclusivity “bugs” in software. We chose 

this particular method as it is evidence-based [8] and is used in practice by technologists around the world (e.g., [9, 17, 23, 30, 32, 
39, 46]). 

At the core of GenderMag are five facets, each of which has a range of facet values an individual could have. The five facets 
are:  motivations  for  using  technology;  information  processing  style;  computer  self-efficacy;  learning  style1  (by  process  or  by 
tinkering); and attitude toward risk. An individual’s set of facet values reflects their cognitive styles that contribute to their use of 
software. GenderMag defines inclusivity bugs as failures of a technology product to support the full range of cognitive styles (such 

as supporting tinkerers but not individuals who prefer understanding a process first before filling in the details). Such barriers are 
cognitive inclusivity bugs because they disproportionately impact people with particular cognitive styles. They are also gender 

inclusivity bugs because the facets capture (statistical) gender differences in how people problem-solve [2, 8, 13, 14, 42, 46].  

GenderMag  uses  three  personas  to  bring  the  facets  to  life:  Abi  (Abigail/Abishek),  Pat  (Patricia/Patrick),  and  Tim 

(Timara/Timothy). Abi’s and Tim’s values for each of these facets lie at opposite ends of the spectrum, and Pat has values within. 
The  Abi  persona  represents  facet  values  that  disproportionately  skew  towards  women,  Tim  represents  facet  values  that 

disproportionately skew towards men, and Pat provides a third set of values [8]. The principle behind GenderMag is that technology 
that simultaneously supports all three personas also supports personas with different mixes of Abi’s, Tim’s, and Pat’s facet values. 

Cognitive styles of the three personas are shown in Figure 2.  

The GenderMag method integrates these personas and their facets into a specialized cognitive walkthrough [8, 28].  As with 

other  cognitive  walkthroughs  [28],  a  GenderMag  walkthrough  involves  walking  through  every  step  of  a  use-case/scenario  and 
answering questions about each subgoal/action a user “should take” to succeed at the use-case. The GenderMag walkthrough also 

refers specifically to the persona and facets in each question. The questions are: 

• 

Before taking any actions: Will <persona> have this subgoal/take this action? Why/what facets? 

1 Here and throughout, “learning style” refers to the GenderMag facet about learning new technologies via process (a top-down style) versus via tinkering (a bottom-up 
style). This is different from the education community’s use of the term “learning styles” referring to learning through different formats (auditory, visual, kinesthetic, 
etc). 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
• 

After taking the “should take” action: If <persona> does the right thing, will they know that they did the right thing and 
are making progress toward their goal?  Why/what facets? 

Empirical studies have found GenderMag to be effective at identifying inclusivity bugs and at pointing toward effective fixes 
[8, 9, 17, 23, 32, 39, 46]. However, in the realm of CS education, the only works relating to GenderMag are Oleson et al.’s Action 

Research investigation into how HCI-oriented faculty teach GenderMag in face-to-face university CS classes [30] and Letaw et 
al.’s investigation into using portions of GenderMag in two online courses [27]. No prior work has investigated how to enable non-

HCI faculty to embed elements of GenderMag into “core CS” across a four-year CS degree program. 

Figure 2: Cognitive styles of the GenderMag personas: Abi, Pat, and Tim 

2.2  Responsible CS  

Our  educate-the-educators  curriculum  aimed  to  support  faculty  embarking  on  an  embedded  inclusive  design  approach  to  CS 
education, which can be considered a form of Responsible Computer Science.  The term “Responsible CS” gained traction with 

the Mozilla Foundation’s Responsible Computer Science Challenge, an effort to teach students mindfulness of ethical problems, 
respect for stakeholders, and how to make accessible design decisions [15, 29]. “Responsible CS” has similarities to “Critical CS” 

[26] in that both schools of thought aim to encourage CS students to think critically about ethical behavior and be mindful of the 
societal implications of their work (e.g., [15, 19, 26, 49]).  

Many Responsible CS approaches minimize faculty workload impacts by not directly involving CS faculty. For example, one 
project at Harvard successfully integrated ethical reasoning throughout mainstream CS courses by bringing philosophy graduate 

students and postdocs into the CS courses [21]. Another project at Brown infused social justice and responsible computing strategies 
throughout their CS curriculum through the work of undergraduate teaching assistants [15]. A third project created a repository of 

ethics modules that faculty could choose from but weren’t involved in creating [7]. Similar examples can be found in [3, 11, 16, 
36, 37, 38] as well as examples of approaches with separate ethics courses (e.g., [10, 18]). Because approaches like these do not 

directly involve CS faculty, they may not need an educate-the-educators curriculum.  

Another common thread among many Responsible CS and Critical CS approaches is an emphasis on building students’ skills 

to reason about ethical problems arising in CS, but not explicitly skill-building their abilities to solve such problems. For example, 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
at one university, classes discuss targeted advertising, bias, disinformation, and other ethics-related topics with the aim of learning 
and reflecting upon these issues [15]. Similarly, another university’s Responsible CS initiative goal was to teach students to be 

conscious  of  ethical  problems  while  reasoning  and  communicating  about  them  [21].  However,  one  recent  study  suggests  that 
approaches like these may not be enough to make a difference in CS students’ ethical behaviors [20]. This study showed that even 

when students were aware of ethical issues, they often did not act upon them ethically. This result suggests that CS faculty may 
need to teach students new skills for solving ethical problems.   

The approach we present in this paper differs from both of the above approaches. First, it emphasizes each CS faculty member 
having ownership of and responsibility for their own class’s Responsible CS elements. Second, it does so by educating the faculty 

on how to teach skills for solving a class of ethical problems. 

2.3  Inclusive Design Education  

Our  educate-the-educators  curriculum  aims  to  provide  CS  faculty  with  the  background  and  skills  to  embed  inclusive  design 
education into their own “mainstream” CS classes. A number of studies suggest that enabling CS faculty to do so can improve 

inclusivity  in  CS  classes.  For  example,  the  DO-IT  project  created  a  web  development  course  that  integrates  accessibility  and 
universal design [1]. To increase feelings of inclusion for both women students and students with disabilities, Blaser et al. proposed 

including  universal  design  principles  in  engineering  courses  to  prepare  future  engineers  better  and  improve  representations  of 
disabled users and engineers [4]. Blaser et al.’s research rests on prior investigations of what diverse students value in their courses 

and jobs, reporting that women in engineering often value contribution to society more than men do, which suggests that women 
may be drawn to inclusive and universal design (e.g., [22]). Similarly, Izzo et al. have found that teaching universal design in 

college courses in order to include people with disabilities helps both students and instructors to improve accessibility, awareness, 
and instructional flexibility [24]. Oleson et al.’s recent study shows the need for such integrations [31]. In this study, HCI students 

themselves reported lacking ability to design for diverse populations or to guard against biasing their designs, and 54% and 49%, 
respectively, of HCI faculty reported occurrences of these inabilities among HCI students. 

Closest to our approach to embedding inclusive design into mainstream CS classes is work from Waller et al. and Putnam et al. 
Waller et al. experimented with integrating accessibility across a curriculum [47], although their approach is less minimally invasive 

than needed for our goals. Similarly, Putnam et al. suggest guidelines for achieving this goal in the accessibility domain [34], and 
we apply their recommendations to our strategy. For example, to enable diverse faculty to include accessibility-related concepts in 

their courses, Putnam recommends: (1) a combination of multiple unique learning experiences (and pointers to key open problems); 
(2) resources to enable a broad set of CS faculty who are not inclusion specialists to integrate teaching inclusion (for Putnam, 

accessibility);  and  (3)  helping  CS  faculty  know  how  to  evaluate  the  effectiveness  of  curriculum  that  include  these  aspects  of 
diversity [34]. Our educate-the-educators curriculum is built on all three of these recommendations.  

In  prior  years,  individual  faculty  at  various  institutions  have  also  included  elements  of  GenderMag  (e.g.,  the  GenderMag 
personas or the method itself) in their courses, especially HCI and Software Engineering courses (e.g., [27, 30]). However, prior 

work has not investigated how to enable a broad spectrum of faculty, including those not trained in HCI, to continually add to 
students’ ability to build inclusive software across a coordinated, 4-year curriculum.  

2.4  Educating Educators to Teach Inclusive Design Content  

Our educate-the-educators curriculum also draws upon three foundations into how to support faculty’s teaching: Communities of 
Practice, the Training of Trainers model, and Pedagogic Content Knowledge (PCK).  

A Community of Practice is a learning community that often engages in informal learning and professional networking [48]. 
Scholars  have  applied  the  concept  to  different  types  of  learning  communities  such  as  professional  learning  communities  [25], 

professional learning networks [44], and faculty inquiry groups [5]. Community of Practice approaches recognize that professional 
development among faculty is a social activity and that communication among participants is key. A Community of Practice has 

three main components: a shared area of interest (the domain), a group of people who engage and share knowledge (the community), 
and a shared collection of resources (the practices) [48]. In our setting, the community’s shared interest (domain) was embedding 

inclusive design across their CS/IT curriculum, the people (community) were the faculty who were working toward this shared 
goal, and the shared collection of resources was a wiki of teaching resources and curricular materials which we seeded and the 

5 

 
 
 
 
faculty eventually contributed to. Our educate-the-educators curriculum used active learning exercises and small-group hands-on 
work to draw the faculty into a Community of Practice.    

The active, hands-on aspects of Communities of Practice also helped to align our educate-the-educators curriculum with the 
Training of Trainers (ToT) model [6, 12, 33]. ToT programs are widely used in medical and health settings and have also been 

used in other educational settings [6]. For example, in a higher education context, Peterson used a ToT approach to teach students 
about civic engagement, so that they may take leadership roles moderating or facilitating public deliberation [33].  

Our educate-the-educators curriculum draws upon multiple ToT properties. Two that are essential in the ToT model are that it 
emphasizes (1) teaching participants, the relevant content (2) using evidence-based approaches for teaching the content to others. 

These  properties  of  ToT  informed  our  curriculum:  we  included  teaching  educators  GenderMag  content  and  how  to  apply 
GenderMag, which is itself an evidence-based approach [8]; and we followed evidence-based approaches to teaching GenderMag 

(e.g., [30]). Other components of the ToT method that we integrated into our educate-the-educators curriculum included modeling 
and skill practice, active learning activities, opportunities for feedback, and follow-up support. For example, we walked the faculty 

through applying GenderMag in one of our sessions and then the faculty applied the method themselves, working in small groups. 
This skill practice and active learning with peers then helped to scaffold their lesson planning. Action planning is another important 

property of the ToT model [6] that we integrated into our educate-the-educators curriculum.  In our case, participants created or 
revised their own course lesson plans to integrate applicable portions of GenderMag content, receiving feedback from the trainers 

and their peers along the way.  

To enable the faculty to embed inclusive design curricular changes in their course, we also drew upon research into applicable 

Pedagogic Content Knowledge (PCK) [40]. PCK is the intersection of pedagogical knowledge (background in effective teaching 
techniques and practices) and content knowledge (background in the subject being taught) that enables faculty to teach particular 

content. PCK is specific to the topic at hand and to the audience [45], so we supported the faculty’s curricular changes by building 
upon Oleson et al.’s investigation into PCK enabling faculty to teach inclusive design skills using GenderMag [30], a point we will 

expand upon in Section 4.4. 

3  ENABLING FACULTY TO EMBED INCLUSIVE DESIGN, AND EVALUATION METHODOLOGY  

We built upon the above foundations to implement the four curriculum elements we briefly described in the Introduction—(1) a 

curriculum element to motivate the faculty; (2) a curriculum element to teach faculty concretely how to do inclusive design with 
GenderMag;  (3) a  curriculum  element  to  help  faculty  create  suitable  integrations  for  their  own  courses;  and  (4) a  curriculum 

element to help faculty develop their pedagogic content knowledge. All of the materials we used to implement these curriculum 
elements are included in the Supplemental Documents accompanying this paper. In the next subsections, we explain our field study 

methodology, and in the next section we present the results of the field study in the context of detailing each of the curriculum 
elements being evaluated.   

3.1  Field Study Span and Context  

To investigate the efficacy of our educate-the-educators curriculum, we conducted a field study over a three-month period from 

early May through late July. We then followed up with the faculty at the end of the subsequent fall term (November and December).  
The field study investigated the on-the-job endeavors of faculty to adjust their own courses to integrate inclusive design concepts 

in time for fall term. They had full ownership of how they adjusted their own courses. In addition, the CS faculty participants’ 
courses together had to fulfill the department’s four-year, whole-curriculum goal of embedding inclusive design. Thus, the courses 

each  year  needed  to build  upon  the  material  taught  in previous  courses,  without  counterproductive  overlaps or gaps  in  needed 
inclusive design prerequisites. 

The  faculty’s  on-the-job  environment  during  the  three-month  field  study  was  virtual  due  to  COVID  lockdowns.  Thus, 
interactions consisted of shared/exchanged documents, emails, online resources, document exchanges, and a Zoom virtual meeting 

room where participants and facilitators could interact and show what was happening on their screens. The educate-the-educators 
curriculum was offered to the faculty via: (1) a 12-hour interactive workshop series split over multiple days and offered twice—

one on two consecutive Saturdays in May for 6 hours per day, and the other on three consecutive weekdays for 4 hours per day 
(roughly  same  number  of  participants  in  each);  (2)  a  set  of  resources  including  an  online  community  of  shared  examples  and 

6 

 
 
 
 
materials that other faculty teaching GenderMag concepts had used; (3) feedback to faculty on their work over the ensuing weeks; 
and (4) occasional emails answering individual questions and providing updates to the online community’s shared materials. In 

contrast to the online environment during the field study, all faculty’s fall classes were entirely in-person. 

3.2  Participating Faculty 

Of the 18 participants, 16 were CS faculty at a single university engaged in the across-the-degree-program effort described earlier. 
These 16 taught CS and IT courses at a public regional Hispanic Serving Institution. Class size in the CS/IT department is relatively 

small (20-25 students) and faculty are rewarded for emphasizing quality teaching. CS faculty cover a BS in Computer Science and 
a BS in Information Technology program. The remaining two participants were a non-CS (education) faculty member at the same 

university, and a non-CS (electrical and computer engineering) faculty member at a different public university. These two non-CS 
participants were engaged in changing only one course each without a need to coordinate with other courses. 

We recruited the faculty through the CS department chair. The chair first canvassed the department faculty and they expressed 
interest in a coordinated adjustment to the four-year CS degree. When we then offered the opportunity for individual faculty to 

participate with their own courses for a modest $500 summer stipend, 15 opted in. Three others eventually joined who had heard 
about it through word-of-mouth (without the stipend). Participant demographics and course coverage are shown in Table 1. 

Table 1. (Left): Faculty participants.  (Right): Courses of the 18 faculty participants that they identified for potential inclusion of GenderMag 
concepts during academic year 2021-22. (Column does not add up to 18 faculty because some faculty were involved in more than 1 course.) 
Mobile Apps was not part of our original plan, but the faculty member took the initiative to add GenderMag to that course. 

Faculty teaching load 
CS Full time (3-5 sections/semester) 
CS Part-time (Adjunct, 1-2 sec./sem.) 
Total CS faculty 
ECE faculty (different university) 
Education faculty (different dept.) 
Grand Total 

Men  Women 

5 
4 
9 
0 
0 
9 

5 
2 
7 
1 
1 
9 

  Undergraduate CS/IT courses covered 
  CS0 (Intro to Programming) 
  CS1 (OOP) 
  CS2 (Data Structures) 
  Object Oriented Design 
  Web Design 
  Mobile Apps 
  Human Computer Interaction 
  Software Engineering 
  Project Management 
  Databases 
  Senior Capstone 

Intro to Engr. (different university) 

  Education course (different dept.) 
  Total: 13 courses 

# of faculty 
3 
3 
1 
2 
2 
1 
2 
1 
1 
2 
2 

1 
1 
18 faculty 

3.3  Activities 

Over the three months in the field study, the faculty participated in the 21 activities in Table 2. Before beginning the activities in 

the table, we reviewed the IRB-approved informed consent document with the participants to gather their consent for our data 
collection. At the end of the three-month period, faculty whose courses were on the fall term schedule took their curricular changes 

into the classroom; we then interviewed those faculty members at the end of fall term.  

3.4  Data   

We collected faculty data multiple times throughout the field study (Table 2), via questionnaire responses, workshop recordings, 
observation notes, faculty-created artifacts, and interviews. In the questionnaires, faculty reflected on their learning, interactions 

with  peers,  and  their  GenderMag  integration  efforts.  The  questionnaire  data  were  qualitative  with text-entry,  Likert  scale,  and 
multiple-choice questions. The faculty-created artifacts came from activities faculty performed during the workshop, emails with 

questions, and course materials the faculty developed over the summer. Faculty iteratively improved these materials over the field 
study  period,  receiving  two  rounds  of  feedback  from  facilitators  (detailed  in  Section  4).  We  collected  their  versions  from  the 

workshop’s  initial  brainstorming,  their  first  submitted  versions  after  the  workshop,  and  then  after  revisions  of  their  second 
submission. Finally, at the end of fall term, we conducted and recorded a 30-minute semi-structured interview with each participant 

who  taught  one  of  the  updated  classes  during  fall  term.  These  interviews  allowed  us  to  compare  faculty’s  pre-classroom 
expectations with their actual classroom experiences. Interview questions are given in the Supplemental Documents.   

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We qualitatively coded the faculty interview data. We derived the codebook from the results of the first three months, which 
will be shown in Tables 3, 4, 5, and 7. Of the fifteen total rows, we used the nine that were relevant to the interview content. To 

code the data, we first segmented each interview by question. Then, two researchers independently coded 21% of the data, with 
80% agreement (Jaccard method) [41]. Given this level of agreement, the same researchers divided up coding the remaining data. 

The full codebook can be found in the Supplemental Documents. 

We  used  these  data  to  evaluate  the  educate-the-educators  curriculum  learning  outcomes  as  follows.  We  evaluated  each 

curriculum  element  as  a  whole  using  the percentage  achieved  collectively  by  the  faculty.  In  addition,  we  evaluated how  many 
individual faculty members achieved the learning outcome using 60% averages as our threshold value (because 60% is the passing 

grade threshold in 90/80/70/60 grading).  In practice, this became a 100% threshold for learning outcomes with two measures, and 
a 67% threshold for learning outcomes with three measures.  

Table 2: Faculty engaged in the 21 activities shown, producing the data shown at the end of each group. (Time lengths approximate.)  

When? 
Workshop Day 
1: 
The ‘content’ 
part of PCK 

Workshop Day 
2: 
The curriculum 
part 

Workshop Day 
3: 
Integrating 
PCK  

Summer: 
Material 
Submissions & 
Revisions 

Summer: 
Surveys 

End of Fall 
Term 

Presentation/activity and data 
Intro to inclusive design and our 
objectives (1hr) 
What is GenderMag, how does it 
work, and who else uses it? (15m) 
Cognitive styles activity (25m) 
GenderMag method lecture (30m) 
GenderMag active learning (2hr) 
Debrief + feedback questionnaire 
Intro to Starter Packs (5m) 
Experiences teaching GenderMag 
(20m) 
Backward Design Template (5m) 
Hands-on: Integrate GenderMag into 
your course + practice teaching (2hr) 
Debrief + feedback questionnaire 
Pedagogical Content Knowledge 
(PCK) Intro (40m) 
Hands-on: Modifying materials + re-
teaching (2hr) 
Discussion (1hr) 
Debrief + feedback questionnaire 
Pre-materials submission (Deadline 
approximately 30 days after 
Workshop 
Material submission #1(Pre-
revisions) (Deadline approximately 
30 days after Workshop) 
Material submission #2 (Post 
revision) (Deadline 22 days after 
submission #1) 
Follow-up questionnaire 
#1(Approximately 3-4 weeks after 
the workshop) 
Follow-up questionnaire #2 
(Approximately 30 days after follow-
up #1) 
Individual interviews (30m) 

Why included 
Initial context 

Brief introduction to GenderMag 

Icebreaker / core GenderMag concept / broadly-applicable activity 
Introduce inclusive design and the GenderMag method 
Faculty learn to do GenderMag method 
Collect response/improvement data 
Faculty get content ideas for materials integration 
Faculty get a sense of what to expect their first time integrating / teaching 
GenderMag 
Faculty get process ideas for materials integration 
Faculty get time to develop materials, work collaboratively, practice 
teaching, and get feedback from experts on their curriculum 
Collect response/improvement data 
Faculty learn effective ways of teaching inclusive design content 

Faculty practice teaching the content and get a sense of what students 
might experience 
Wrap up 
Collect response/improvement data 
Collect baseline course materials (pre-GenderMag) 
*Faculty may not have known which materials would be adapted prior to 
the workshop, thus these were requested post-workshop 
Collect first draft GenderMag-integrated course materials 
*Materials were sent back with feedback 12 days after they were turned in  

Collect GenderMag-integrated course materials after revisions 
*Some materials were sent back with additional feedback 6 days after 
they were turned in 
Collect response/improvement data 

Collect response/improvement data 

Collect teaching experiences from fall faculty 

4  EDUCATE-THE-EDUCATORS CURRICULUM AND FIELD STUDY RESULTS 

This section details the elements of our educate-the-educators curriculum, how we conveyed the curriculum during the workshop 
and  post-workshop  follow-ups,  how  faculty  responded  to  the  curriculum,  and  what  happened  when  faculty  applied  what  they 

learned by teaching GenderMag concepts during Fall 2021.  

8 

 
 
 
 
4.1  Curriculum Element #1: Getting Faculty Motivated  

Motivating the faculty was critical to the project’s success because, if the faculty were not motivated, they would be unlikely to be 

effective  in  contributing  to  the  coordinated  four-year  effort.  Thus,  our  objective  with  this  element  was  Learning  Outcome  #1: 
enabling  faculty  to  analyze  the  costs  and  benefits  of  integrating  inclusive  design  into  their  own  course(s).  We  implemented 

Curriculum Element #1 through the following five mechanisms: 

(1) Appeal to costs/benefits/rewards as per the faculty reward system 

Curriculum Element #1: Motivating the faculty  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

(4) Explain the equity and inclusion benefits 
(5) Provide data on prior student outcomes and experiences 

(2) Explain the coordinated “big picture” 
(3) Emphasize each faculty member’s control over their own courses 

Regarding  mechanism  (1),  this  university’s  reward  criteria  were  quite  conducive  to  the  costs/benefits/reward  aspect  of  this 

curriculum element. This university’s reward system emphasizes effective teaching as its top criterion for faculty retention and 
encourages new teaching techniques. Participating in this program was a way to receive credit for doing so: 

(University’s faculty retention criteria): “List any new teaching materials, teaching techniques, etc., …” 

(CS Dept Chair, interview): “Professional development is encouraged and must be documented.” 

For mechanisms (2) and (3), we presented the “big picture” to show not only the coordinated whole but also to appeal to some 

faculty’s enjoyment of a collaborative activity (Figure 3).  

P12 (Day 2 Feedback): “<Excited about> seeing the connections between the classes.” 

Figure 3: The “big picture” showed to faculty to guide their efforts and emphasize the need for coordination and lack of overlap (Left): Excerpt 
from course list for the first two years, showing how the pieces fit together and the minimal classtime expected. For example, for the Intro CS 
course, we suggested adding only 1/2 new lecture, plus updating an exercise and assignments. (Right): The second two years. HCI1 and SE1 were 
the only courses for which we recommended significant lecture/classtime additions. 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We drew upon a Community of Practice approach (as explained in Section 2.4) by emphasizing that each faculty member has 
an important role to play in the delivery of the curriculum to students and that effective collaboration and coordination would bring 

about better outcomes. At the same time, we also emphasized to faculty that they were not being asked to hand over control of their 
course content. It was important that they see the value in the community efforts, yet not feel constrained by them. To support this, 

the presentation offered  suggestions on how to fulfill each learning outcome, not requirements (mechanism 3). In fact, faculty 
would need to be creative to make their integration authentic.  

As Figure 3 shows, the presentation also provided some cost/benefit information (mechanism 1), showing the minimal classtime 
the  new  material  would  occupy  and  the  resources  faculty  could  use/customize  if  desired  (e.g.,  sample  lectures,  sample  active 

learning exercises, etc.). To further emphasize low time cost and community support, we connected them to a Slack channel for 
sharing emerging materials with each other. 

For mechanisms (4) and (5), we turned to data from other CS education projects. For example, we presented data on students’ 
responses, success rates, and diversity/equity/inclusion results from other studies on faculty who had taught with GenderMag [27, 

30]. These data were compelling to some faculty: 

P13 (Day 2 Feedback): “Excited to see how it influences the <students’> project teams (and how they work together)” 

P17 (Day 2 Feedback): “Great to hear that students felt more inclusive and learned about their own processing style.”  

At first, some participants anticipated needing to spend significant time on the integration efforts: 

P15 (Day 3 Feedback): “I think I need to update a lot of assignments…” 

 However, by Day 3 all reporting participants had converged to anticipating a light or medium burden and some participants 

commented that the work was important: 

P06  (Day  3  Feedback):  “…it  is  not  a  burden  to  include  <GenderMag  in  courses>  and  learn  about  how  to  be  more 

inclusive.” 

By the end of the three-month period, 14/17 of reporting participants reached the learning outcome threshold of 60% (practical 

threshold: 67% since there were three measures), as shown in Table 3. 

Table 3: Faculty responses relating to Curriculum Element #1, as of follow-up questionnaire #2. Note that after day 1, P08 withdrew due to 
illness. Overall, the majority of participants had noted a benefit of integrating portions of GenderMag into their course by the time we collected 
follow-up questionnaire #2.   
✓: yes/agree, ✕: no/disagree , -: neither agree nor disagree , n/a: could not respond (e.g., did not do the questionnaire)  

Burden to integrate light? 
(Day 3) 
Material relevant to your 
students? (Follow-up #2) 
Benefit of incorporating into 
course? (By end) 

P01  P02  P03  P04  P05  P06  P07  P08  P09  P10  P11  P12  P13  P14  P15  P16  P17  P18  Total 
-  ✓  ✓  n/a  6/16 

-  ✓  ✓  n/a 

-  ✓ 

✓ 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

✓  ✓ 

- 

-  ✓  ✓  ✓  n/a  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  n/a  14/16 

✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✕  ✓  ✓  ✕  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  n/a  15/17 

Overall success rate: 35 ✓s out of 49 possible (71%)      

4.2  Curriculum Element #2: Teaching Faculty GenderMag Content 

For faculty to teach content on inclusive design, they would need to gain expertise in the content area, so Curriculum Element 
#2  taught  inclusive  design  concretely  in  the  form  of  the  GenderMag  method  (Section  2.1).  The  associated  learning  outcome, 

Learning Outcome #2, was enabling faculty to evaluate software using the GenderMag method and recognize its use to identify 
meaningful issues in software. We aligned this element with several steps from the Training of Trainers research (as described in 

Section  2.4),  particularly  providing  information  on  how  people  learn  through  the  GenderMag  cognitive  styles  and  offering 
opportunities for practicing new skills through active learning [12]. Our mechanisms for Curriculum Element #2 were as follows: 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Curriculum Element #2: GenderMag content 
• 
• 
• 

(1) Cognitive styles sharing activity  
(2) GenderMag lecture 
(3) GenderMag active learning activity (learning by doing) 

Even though many faculty would be teaching only a portion of the GenderMag method, the curriculum element included the 
full GenderMag method. One reason for including the full GenderMag method was to illustrate to faculty the proficiency we wanted 

students to acquire by the end of their degree; another was to model to faculty how we teach the components of the method (part 
of Curriculum Element #4); and a third reason was that teaching a specific method provided a concrete, hands-on way to introduce 

faculty to inclusive design.  

The first mechanism by which we taught this content was a cognitive styles sharing activity. Faculty were asked to share their 

facet values by placing a marker with their name on the scale as shown in Figure 4. These facet values  were defined earlier in 
Figure 2, which we also presented to the faculty. 

Figure 4: An example of part of the cognitive style sharing activity from two of the faculty participants who learned they process information 
differently. This was a PowerPoint-based version of the activity from the June workshop (which worked better than a Jamboard-based version in 
the May workshop). 

The  activity  fulfilled  several  functions.  It  served  as  a  community  builder  as  faculty  came  to  know  how  their  peers  tend  to 

problem-solve.  At  the  same  time,  it  offered  faculty  insight  into  how  users  learn  to  use  technology  in  different  ways.  It  also 
introduced central concepts of GenderMag and was an activity suitable for any CS/IT course requiring groupwork by the students. 

The activity resulted in a rich whole-group discussion, with faculty engagement becoming more personal. For example, faculty 
were able to connect the activity’s implications to their own teaching styles and to their students. 

P07 (Day 1 transcript): “…I think I am more like Tim…I need to feel that I am free to make errors. This is also a part of 

my teaching style.” 

P14 (Day 1 transcript): “…in the context of teaching, students would be all over the spectrum…” 
P13 (Day 1 transcript): “…it would be interesting to see…<how students form groups> in terms of…problem solving 

styles and so forth.” 

P12 (Day 1 transcript): “It also helps you spot the conflicts in the groups…the ones who want to complete tasks versus 

the ones who are tech interested…you get a boiling point at some point time.” 

Building upon the faculty’s understanding of cognitive styles, mechanism (2) presented the full GenderMag method as a 30-

minute  lecture.  The  lecture  introduced inclusive design  through  the  GenderMag  method—in  ways  that  did not  require  an  HCI 
background, so it would serve as appropriate introductory material for both faculty and students. In this introductory segment, the 

facilitators modeled the application of the GenderMag method to provide a concrete example faculty could later use to engage their 
students. The slide deck, derived from the GenderMag repository2, is provided in the Supplemental Documents. The lecture was 

2 https://www.oercommons.org/groups/gendermag-inclusivemag/10149/ 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
followed by a two-hour active learning component, in which faculty split into small groups to use GenderMag to evaluate and 
improve a software product’s inclusivity.  

The  activity  involved  each  small  group  “walking”  through  a  use-case  of  a  software  design  we  had  provided,  at  each  step 
evaluating the usability experience a GenderMag persona might have. Faculty considered a use case for Canvas, a popular education 

software platform, from the perspective of the Abi persona. With this perspective, they answered questions about Abi’s use of the 
software as described in Section 2.1. The activity materials are given in the Supplemental Documents. We coached faculty on this 

activity and regularly brought them back together for sharing their results and large-group discussions. However, most of the time 
they were learning without us, mirroring an active-learning in-class activity they might use in their own classes. By the end of the 

activity, they had gained skills in locating “inclusivity bugs” in software and were suggesting the fixes. 

P05+P06+P08  (written  portion  of  GenderMag  evaluation,  Day  1):  “There’s  no  indication  of  progress/process.” 

(inclusivity bug for Abi, relating to Computer Self-Efficacy and Learning Style) 

P01+P02 (written portion of GenderMag evaluation, Day 1): “…the association between the account and the actual video 

is not clear and <Abi is not> a risk taker…Maybe show the video list. Then show the account…” (bias against Abi 

found for Attitude Towards Risk and Learning Style facets) 

By  the  end  of  Day  1,  14/17  (82%)  of  reporting  faculty  members  reached  the learning outcome  threshold  of 60%  (practical 
threshold, given two measures: 100%) with 14/17 who reported being able to do a GenderMag evaluation and 16/17 (94%) who 

said that using GenderMag had revealed meaningful issues in the software they had evaluated (Table 4). 

Table 4: Curriculum Element #2 results, from faculty responses to Day 1 feedback questionnaire. 16/17 of the faculty met the learning outcome 
threshold. ✓,X,-,n/a: same as Table 3.  

Can do GenderMag eval? 

GenderMag found 
meaningful issues? 

P01  P02  P03  P04  P05  P06  P07  P08  P09  P10  P11  P12  P13  P14  P15  P16  P17  P18  Total 
-  ✓  n/a  14/17 
✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✕  ✓ 

-  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓ 

✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✕  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  n/a  16/17 

Overall success rate: 30/34 (88%)  

4.3  Curriculum Element #3: Guiding Faculty Through Embedding GenderMag Concepts into Courses  

In Curriculum Element #3, faculty needed to act upon what they had learned—i.e., decide what portions of inclusive design 
content they wanted to use in their own courses and how. To support their efforts, this curriculum element used four mechanisms 

which leveraged a Training of Trainers approach through an emphasis on practice and feedback, action planning with backward 
design, and multiple support opportunities for faculty [6, 12, 33]. We also continued to foster a Community of Practice through an 

ongoing emphasis on peer collaboration and support. Thus, the desired Learning Outcome #3 was for faculty to be able to integrate 
inclusive design into existing course materials with provided resources and collaboration. 

Curriculum Element #3 

• (1) Process ideas (backward design, starter packs, and example integration)  
• (2) Content ideas (online community) 

• (3) Material creation with coaching and collaboration 
• (4) Material submissions and feedback 

Mechanism (1) scaffolded the faculty’s creative efforts with materials defining a process they could follow, including examples 

of following it. The process, backward design [35], is a well-known process for curriculum creation. It starts by considering how 
to assess whether students have achieved the desired learning outcome, then considers assignments that could be assessed in that 

way, and finally designs portions of the course that would enable students to succeed at such an assignment. For example, Figure 
5 shows P06’s use of this process.  

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Excerpt from P06’s three-week curriculum plan created using the backward design template. 

To further support faculty’s action planning, in mechanism (2) we provided “starter packs”: templates for each year of a 4-year 
CS degree, with fill-in stages for backward design and suggested materials housed in an online community for faculty who teach 

with GenderMag [43]. The online community content includes lecture slides, homeworks, readings, in-class activities, and exam 
questions that participants could reuse or adapt. As one example, nine faculty incorporated a GenderMag personas graphic (shown 

previously in Figure 2) into their course materials. In the Day 2 feedback, 14/16 (88%) of reporting faculty  responded that the 
starter packs were useful and 8/16 (50%) responded, when we followed up after the workshop, that they used the online community 

frequently.   

Mechanism (3) encouraged collaboration as the faculty began their course changes. Faculty joined Zoom breakout rooms of 

two to four faculty teaching similar courses. Facilitators also visited each room from time to time to offer additional coaching if 
needed. Most participants’ responses to these mechanisms were very positive. 

P06 (Day 2 feedback): “<Participant’s> revision/additions to my course outline were amazing.” 
P16 (Day 3 feedback): “The breakout rooms were very collaborative and lots of interesting ideas.” 

P15 (Day 2 feedback): “…break out group <made me feel excited about integrating GenderMag>” 
P02 (Follow-Up #2): “<P01> spoke of the Facets details …helped me to see the whole picture of this research project 

and helped me to navigate through the course material.” 

P07 (Day 2 Feedback): “Many of the recommendations <facilitator> made for <participant> were helpful for me to think 

through how I can utilize this to help my students understand how cognitive styles impact the way students learn.” 

That  said,  some  of  their  collaborations  had  rocky  starts.  After  the  first  day  of  the  workshop,  two  participants  reported  a 

“somewhat  poor”  experience  working  with  peers  and  three  reported  it  went  only  “somewhat  well”.  Reasons  given  were 
interpersonal, technological, and task-related. 

P06 (Day 1 feedback; peer work went somewhat poorly): “…I ended up trying to get folks involved and then stepped 

back because I do not like being in that role continuously.” 

P05 (Day 1 feedback; peer work went somewhat well): “Lots of confusion due to screens not being shared for long…” 
P07 (Day 1 feedback; peer work went somewhat well): “My peers were great, but I think we are all figuring out how to 

complete the tasks.” 

However, by the end of the workshop, all reports were that peer work went well, as Table 5 will show at the end of this section. 

Mechanism  (4)  added  a  feedback  loop  over  the  next  few  weeks  in  which  participants  turned  in  their  course  materials  and 
received feedback. Of the 18 participants, 16 turned in materials for feedback (e.g., Figure 6). Two participants’ materials were 

approved without further changes. However, the remaining materials (14 participants) required some iteration. For example, some 
participants added too much GenderMag material too early in the four-year sequence, and others too little GenderMag where it was 

needed in the four-year sequence. Facilitators provided feedback for these 14.  

After  getting  feedback,  most  participants  continued  but  two  withdrew.  These  two  participants  had  been  collaborating  on 

materials for backend-focused courses. But in our feedback, we had asked them to apply inclusive design content to a different part 
of an assignment: a GUI implementation activity instead of a backend technical learning activity.  In retrospect, we believe our 

feedback may have undercut our own goals because the faculty responded:  

13 

 
 
 
 
 
P04  (Email  after  first  iteration  of  feedback):  “We  think…good  candidate  courses  for  GenderMag  should  be  GUI-

related…” 

Our feedback might have been more successful had it supported integration into the backend content, which would have been 
both feasible and appropriate for the course. The participants’ decision to withdraw also reinforced Curriculum Element #1’s third 

mechanism:  Emphasize  each  faculty  member’s  control  over  their  own  courses.  The  two  participants  might  have  felt  we  were 
reducing their control over their own courses. 

The remaining faculty who needed revisions submitted a second round of materials. The facilitators fully approved 9/14 (64%) 

without further changes; the rest received suggestions for minor changes.  

 From the original group of 18 faculty, 15 decided to teach their courses with GenderMag content embedded.  
Three  examples  of  their  GenderMag-integrated  course  materials  are  included  here.  First,  Figure  6  shows  P10’s  and  P11’s 

development of an assignment for an introductory programming course, which incorporates an informal evaluation of software 
using the GenderMag personas. Second, Figure 7 shows an excerpt from activity created by P06 and P07 which introduces the 

GenderMag facets for an introductory computing course and for P07’s education course. Finally, Figure 8 shows a project created 
by P18 which includes the use of the full GenderMag method.   

By the end of this curriculum element, 15/18 (83%) of faculty reached the learning outcome threshold of 60% of the measures 

in Table 5. 

Figure 6: (Top): Changes made by P10 (purple) and P11 (green) as they collaborated on curricular materials during the workshop. (Bottom): 
After submitting a more polished version of the materials, facilitators responded with specific suggestions for improvements. 

Figure 7: In-class activity by P06 and P07 for students to identify their own facet values. The template referenced is similar to that used in the 
workshop, shown earlier in Figure 4. 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8: (Top): An excerpt from the final project given by P18 in which students were asked to complete a cognitive walkthrough on their 
team’s software. (Bottom): Part of the customizable persona provided for students to use in their cognitive walkthrough. 

Table 5: Curriculum Element #3 results, from faculty questionnaire responses and the curriculum materials they created. Overall, faculty reported 
that the resources provided were useful and they had good experiences working with peers. ✓,✕,-,n/a: same as Table 3. Multiple marks are 
present when the faculty member was teaching multiple courses. 

P01  P02  P03  P04  P05  P06  P07  P08  P09  P10  P11  P12  P13  P14  P15  P16  P17  P18  Total 
n/a  12/16 
✓  ✓ 

-  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  n/a  ✓ 

-  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓ 

- 

- 

-  ✓  ✓  ✓  n/a  ✓  ✓  ✕ 

-  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓ 
✓ 

-  ✕ 

- 

-  ✓  n/a  14/16 
n/a  8/16 
- 

- 

- 

Backward design template 
useful? (Day 2) 
Starter packs useful? (Day 2)  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  n/a 
Online community used 
✓  ✓ 
frequently? (Follow-Up #1) 
Working with peers ok? (Day 
3) 
Integrated GenderMag 
concepts? (By first feedback) 
Materials fully approved? (By 
second feedback) 
Teaching GenderMag in 
course(s) this year 

✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  n/a  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  n/a  16/16 

✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓✓  ✓  ✓  n/a  ✓  ✓✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓✓✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  21/21 

✓  ✓  n/a  n/a  ✕✕  ✓  ✓  n/a  ✓  ✓✕  ✕  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓✕✕  ✕  ✓  ✓  12/19 

✓  ✓  ✕  ✕  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✕  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  15/18 

Overall success rate: 98/122 (80%)  

4.4  Curriculum Element #4: Developing Faculty’s Pedagogic Content Knowledge  

Curriculum Element #4’s Learning Outcome #4 aimed to help faculty prepare to engage and guide students on learning GenderMag 

concepts. As was mentioned in Section 2.4, education researchers have pointed out that knowledge of content is not enough to 
effectively teach that content; knowledge of how to effectively teach this content is called Pedagogic Content Knowledge (PCK). 

To  help  faculty  harness  and/or  develop  appropriate  PCK  for  their  additions,  we  used  a  combination  of  modeling,  peer  active 
learning, and prior PCK solutions for teaching inclusive design (Training of Trainers modeling of skills, skill practice, and feedback 

[6, 12, 33]; Community of Practice peer collaboration, support, and shared resources [48]): 

(1) See teaching of GenderMag concepts modeled 

Curriculum Element #4: PCK  
• 
• 
• 

(2) Practice teaching their new materials with peers  
(3) Known PCKs for teaching inclusive design 

After  seeing  strategies  for  teaching  GenderMag  while  learning  it  themselves  during  Day  1  (mechanism  1  above),  faculty 

collaborated in small groups on developing each other’s materials and took turns teaching the new content to each other (mechanism 
2) for about four hours during the workshop. This work time was intended to help faculty practice teaching and find potential 

problems with their materials, promote collaboration, and provide an opportunity to complete much of their integration work during 
time they had already set aside. At first, their plans were so rough that problems were easily spotted. However, as they iterated, the 

peer playing the “student” role sometimes needed to deliberately act as though they were an uninterested, resistant, or obtuse student 
to bring out problems that can arise in those situations. (Some of the faculty were quite inventive in playing these roles.) 

P06 (Follow-up 1): “Teaching <participant> a lesson we created together was incredibly fun and helpful…” 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P12 (Follow-up 2): “It was productive to spend time hearing … how they taught the materials…” 
P16 (Follow-up 2): “The breakout rooms were immensely helpful … in getting feedback on our initial ideas and how to 

improve upon them.”  

Once the faculty had helped one another unearth problems  and attempt to resolve them, we introduced PCK elements from 

Oleson  et  al.’s  field  study of  eight  faculty  members  teaching  inclusive design  [30]  (mechanism 3).  From  that  study’s 11  PCK 
practices, we emphasized four of them (Table 6). For example, our presentation of PCK-11 (Handling resistance) is shown in Table 

6. 

Curriculum  Element #4’s  pairing  of  mechanisms  (2)  and  (3)  turned  out  to  be  quite  effective.  Although  individual  faculty’s 

responses to questions asking about their confidence in teaching the material varied by timing and by content,  16/17 (94%) of 
reporting participants successfully reached the learning outcome, and the overall positive response rate was 86% (Table 7). 

Table 6: (Left): The four PCKs highlighted from Oleson et al.’s study [30] on workshop Day 3.  
(Right): Example: Excerpts from workshop slides on PCK11. 

PCK1-Framing: Providing foundations first can give students the 
capacity to understand and engage with inclusive design methods 

PCK2-Credibility:  Providing  students  credible  resources  can 
convince them inclusive design methods are valid and useful 
PCK6-TheoryOfMind: Coaching students to immerse themselves 
in the persona can help them with their “Theory of Mind” abilities 
to see software through the eyes of a persona 
PCK11-HandlingResistance: Relating inclusive design methods’ 
utility  to  the  broader  goal  of  inclusive  appeal  and/or  greater 
market  share  can  mitigate  the  risk  of  students’  resistance  and 
motivate them to learn inclusive design. 

Table 
7: 

Curriculum #4 results from faculty responses to Day 1 and 3 Feedback as well as Follow up #2 about their ability to apply PCK and preparation 
to teach. Overall, participants indicated they were ready. ✓,✕,-,n/a: same as Table 3 

P01  P02  P03  P04  P05  P06  P07  P08  P09  P10  P11  P12  P13  P14  P15  P16  P17  P18  Total 
-  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✕  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  n/a  15/17 
✓  ✓  ✓ 

✓  ✕  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓ 

- 

n/a 

-  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  n/a  13/16 

✓  ✓ 

-  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  n/a  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓ 

-  ✓  ✓  ✓  n/a  14/16 

Overall success rate: 42/49 (86%) 

Can answer student questions 
about GenderMag eval? 
(Feedback Day 1) 
Prepared to apply PCK? 
(Feedback Day 3) 
Teach GenderMag in engaging 
way? (Follow-up #2) 

4.5  Faculty Reflections 

Up to this point, we have evaluated the educate-the-educators curriculum’s effectiveness by each of their learning outcomes. 

As Tables 3, 4, 5, and 7 show, learning outcome rates for each curriculum element ranged from 71% to 94%. Now, we consider 
how  these  learning  outcomes  translated  to  the  experiences  of  the  ten  faculty  whose  revised  courses  occurred  in  the  fall  term 

schedule.  These  10  faculty  taught  16  sections  of  7  courses  covering  CS0,  CS1,  CS2,  Web  Design,  Mobile  Apps,  Software 
Engineering, and Education (non-CS). In total, they taught 275 students. 

After teaching the inclusive design content, each faculty member shared their teaching experiences through the interviews we 
conducted  at  the  end  of  fall  term  (Section  3)  and  we  compared  these  interview  results  with  the  learning outcome  results  from 

Sections 4.1-4.4.  

Most of the faculty’s interview content indicated that their fall courses went at least as well as the faculty had expected (Table 

8). In fact, 91% of these findings agreed with or were more positive than the expectations they had reported earlier (Tables 3, 4, 5, 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and  7).  Table  8  summarizes  their  positive  and  negative  reflections  upon  how  the  term  went  for  them  as  compared  with  the 
curriculum element evaluations of the previous four sections. 

Table 8: Fall Term faculty reflections.  +: positive reflection, -: negative reflection, ~: indirect positive reflection. 
Comparisons with Tables 3, 4, 5, and 7: green: better than anticipated, yellow: same as anticipated, orange: worse than anticipated. 
(Note: P18 did not fill out the questionnaires for Table 3, Table 4, Table 5, Table 7.) 

Curriculum Element 
1: Motivating  

2: Content 

3: Embedding 
4: PCK 

Burden to integrate light? 
Material relevant to your students? 
Benefit of incorporating into course? 
Can do GenderMag  eval? 
GenderMag found meaningful issues? 
Online community used? 
Can answer student questions about GenderMag? 
Prepared to apply PCK? 
Teach GenderMag in engaging way? 

P01  P05  P07  P09  P10  P11  P15  P16  P17  P18 
+ -  + 

+ 

+ 
+ 
+ 

+ 
+ 
+ 

+ - 
+ 
+ 

+ 
+ 

+ 
+ 

+ 

+ 
- 

+ 

+ - 
+ 
+ 

+ 

+ 

+ 
+ 

+ 
~ 

+ 
~ 

- 
+ 
+ 
+~ 
+ 
+ 

+ 
+ 
+ 
+ ~  ~ 

+ 
~ 

Relating to Curriculum Element #1 (Motivating), faculty reflected upon the costs and benefits they had experienced when they 

taught the content to their students. Most faculty were positive about the burden to integrate the content, and three faculty members 
said it was lighter than they had expected. However, a few faculty members experienced a burden they regarded as heavy. For P18, 

the burden was due to grading and collecting data: 

P18 (Interview): “I think it went well. Unfortunately, I'm transitioning back to face-to-face myself, and I think I created 

a very poor assignment, which, as a result, I had to spend quite a bit of time grading…” 

Nonetheless, they seemed optimistic about addressing the roadblocks in future terms:  

P18 (Interview): “…the <course> is taught in spring so I’ll be doing it there… and then I would certainly do it again next 
fall in <course> and again make sure I’m getting the information I want without <making grading and data collection 

hard>.” 

The remaining two faculty reporting burdens described front-end (course planning) burdens, namely, finding time in the course 

for added material, especially given the context of the pandemic and the return to in-person learning: 

P01 (Interview): “I don't have enough time <in the course>…because of the transition from online to non-online. Some 

<students were> quarantined, some students <tested> positive...” 

P11 (Interview): “…there's a lot of material to cover and…it's very hard to squeeze…in all of <the regular content> and 

also this.”  

Still the same two faculty members did not see actually running their revised courses as burdensome, once they had figured out 

their changes:  

P01 (Interview) “So it's really not much difference <in workload>… it's not a problem for me at all.” 

P11 (Interview): “No, <the only workload is> just the extra assignment to grade… It’s easy. It's not difficult” 

The bottom line for P11 was that the benefits outweighed the costs. In fact, they advocated for growing the effort.  

P11 (Interview): “Cost is, I guess, maybe you have to go through the workshop and understand and stuff but... I think the 

cost is minimal and the effect much overweighs it.” 

P11 (Interview): “I think we could get all the other faculty kind of on board so that you know they could try it out.” 

In total, 7 of the 10 interviewees spoke of the benefits and/or relevance of adding this content to their courses. 

 P17 (Interview): “I think that the students realizing <which persona> they directly related to, I think is a great thing to 

walk away from here.” 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P16 (Interview): “I think opening their minds to other perspectives…there's obviously a great need for more of it and I 

think the students did get that through the experience <with inclusive design content>.” 

Interviewees offered few remarks that related to the learning outcomes of Elements #2 (Content) and #3 (Embedding), but the 
points  these  faculty  made  about  these  topics  aligned  with  the  earlier  learning  outcome  evaluations.    One  example  was  P18’s 

description  of  an  instance  in  which  the  new  content  helped  students  who  were  developing  a  clothing  retail  application to  find 
meaningful issues (Element #2’s learning outcome):  

P18 (Interview): “And at first they had thought that people would go there with the demographic of say 18 to 22 and buy 
clothing. But when they started working with the GenderMag, they suddenly realized people might go to buy clothing 

for people 18 to 20 and they had not thought about, you know, the super-buyer.” 

The interviewees had a great deal to say about Curriculum Element #4 (PCK). Most faculty felt reasonably successful in this 

regard. Compared to the workshop, two faculty members were able to demonstrate use of the PCK after previously indicating that 
they were neither prepared nor unprepared to do so. However, two faculty members also reported being unable to answer some of 

the questions that arose in their classes.  

P01 (Interview): “<Some students> think that <Computer Science is> equal already; they shouldn’t need to talk about 

<GenderMag>... I did not <respond>.” 

P05 (Interview): “<The students> felt like if the site was accessible… we didn't need to apply the GenderMag method, 

because we're thinking of all these accessibility use cases… I didn't have a follow up to that.” 

On the other hand, two others reported being comfortable answering the students’ questions. 

P16 (Interview): “At least two students that were like, ‘Why are we doing this? Like what are we supposed to be doing?’ 
And  so  of  course,  I  responded  and  really  emphasized  why  this  is  important  for  web  developers  as  they  enter  the 

profession to really be familiar with.” 

P09 (Interview): “Once I went to your website and I explained what it really is [using] some charts and diagrams on the 

website, too, nobody had any follow-up questions.” 

One faculty member reported that some students were overwhelmed by too much overlap in the content among different courses, 

which was a situation we had been trying to avoid through the collaboration/community aspects of the curriculum:  

P05 (Interview): “I know a couple…students <who are> doing <inclusive design content> for all of their other classes 

and they  are  just kind  of  burnt out over  it.  I  think  it's…because…new  stuff  coming  at  them  from  several  different 

professors, several different ways of doing it.” 

In contrast, another faculty member reported some students were interested in learning more: 

P01(Interview): “<There was> somebody enthusiastic and they say they want to know more. I had to tell them that you 

have to take the HCI class which is elective.” 

These results will inform future iterations on our educate-the-educators curriculum and the accompanying resources we provide 

to support it. For example, we could specifically train faculty to answer common questions and use the PCK to address concerns. 
In fact, P05 directly asked for a review of the workshop material and references for answering common questions. As we continue 

to adapt our online community, we hope to make these resources readily available and easily accessible. 

Overall, faculty reported that the majority of student reactions were positive and engaged.  

P17 (Interview): “The good reaction I thought was when my students said that they directly relate it to the persona.” 
P16 (Interview): “…it was interactive, it was engaging. The students were lively” 

P01 (Interview): “Unexpectedly, people talked so much about <the inclusive design personas> and then made the final 

project more lively…they <were> more active in doing <the> project” 

18 

 
 
 
 
5  CONCLUDING REMARKS 

In this paper, we have presented an educate-the-educators curriculum to enable faculty to carry out a coordinated, four-year 
vision of graduating computing students who do inclusive design as part of their everyday software development work. We built 

this  educate-the-educators  curriculum  “on  the  shoulders  of  giants”  by  following  recommendations  from  earlier  work  from  the 
accessibility  education  community,  Community  of  Practice  research,  Training  of  Trainers  research,  and  Pedagogic  Content 

Knowledge results from teaching inclusive design.  

We investigated the approach’s efficacy over a three-month period and end-of-fall interviews, in which 18 faculty experienced 

our educate-the-educators curriculum and decided whether and how to follow up. Ten of the faculty then took their GenderMag-
integrated course materials into their classrooms fall term. (The other faculty’s courses are scheduled in future terms.) We followed 

their progress from the outset of the project through their end-of-summer preparations to offer the materials they had developed to 
their classes, and then gathered how their changes had turned out in their classrooms. 

Among the results were: 

•  Curriculum Element #1 (Motivating the faculty): Included in the questions we considered were whether faculty would choose 

to participate in a coordinated effort to embed inclusive design across the four-year curriculum, whether they would find the 
time cost of doing so to be onerous, and whether they foresaw benefits to their courses and their students from doing so. The 

field study results showed that none of the faculty considered the cost to be heavy, and almost all of them saw the approach 
to be beneficial to their courses. Although one participant dropped out at this stage, 14/17 (82%) of reporting faculty met the 

learning outcome threshold. Overall, 35/49 (71%) of faculty responses were favorable, only 2/49 (4%) were negative, and 
the remaining responses were neutral (from Table 3).   

•  Curriculum Element #2 (Teaching the faculty inclusive design via GenderMag): This curriculum element was a prerequisite 
for the rest of the project. The challenge was to enable faculty across a wide range of CS specialties to understand inclusive 

design well enough to teach portions of it to their classes. Fortunately, the results were very positive: 16/17 of the faculty 
reported the method to be useful, and 14/17 reported being able to perform GenderMag evaluations, and 14/17 (82%) of 

reporting faculty met the learning outcome threshold. In total, 30/34 (88%) of the faculty responses were favorable (Table 
4). 

•  Curriculum Element #3 (Embedding GenderMag concepts into their courses): At this point, faculty needed to act upon what 
they had learned, by starting work on integrating inclusive design concepts into their courses. This curriculum element made 

extensive use of collaboration among small peer groups, personalized coaching, and several feedback loops. Along the way, 
two  faculty  eventually  decided  that  their  courses  could  not  profitably  include  the  material,  but  the  remainder  followed 

through, ultimately preparing all the materials they would need to walk into class this fall. 13/18 (72%) of reporting faculty 
met the learning outcome threshold. Overall, responses for this curriculum element were 98/122 (80%) positive (Table 5). 
•  Curriculum  Element  #4  (Developing  faculty’s  PCK):  This  curriculum  element  aimed  to  help  faculty  progress  from  just 
teaching the new materials to teaching them effectively. Ultimately, faculty rated their abilities in this area positively: almost 

all reported being prepared to answer students’ questions about the material, teach the material engagingly, and apply the 
PCK elements they had found useful. 16/17 (94%) of the reporting faculty met the learning outcome threshold, and overall 

this curriculum element received 42/49 (86%) positive responses (Table 7).   

•  Results  from  the  end-of-fall  interviews:  Ten  faculty  members’  updated  classes  occurred  during  fall  term,  in  which  they 

taught 16 sections of 7 courses, which served a total of 275 students. 91% of their reported outcomes indicated that their 

incorporations of inclusive design concepts into their courses went as well as or better than they had expected (Table 8).  

As to the “big picture”, how well did the faculty’s efforts fit together? Table  9 overviews the  year-by-year coverage of the 
inclusive design content that faculty implemented  in their courses. As the table shows, the most basic level of inclusive design 

(understanding differences in cognitive styles) is introduced in Year 1 and applied across all four years. Over the next years, the 
level of student engagement in inclusive design increases, until by Year 4 they are applying the full GenderMag method to their 

coursework.   

19 

 
 
 
 
Table 9: By Fall 2021, GenderMag inclusive design concepts were integrated throughout the 4-year undergraduate CS/IT curriculum at 
University X. (Light): Learning; (Dark): After learning, acting upon. Year 1: CS0; Year 2: CS1; Year 3: Web Dev., Project Management, Object 
Oriented Design, Mobile Apps., HCI; Year 4: Software Eng., Capstone. 

Year 1 

Year 2 

Year 3 

Year 4 

 (Basic inclusion) Cognitive styles 
 (Apply to software) Evaluation 
 (Act upon evaluation) Fixes 
 (Systematic process) Full GenderMag method 

These results are very encouraging, but we have investigated them only in the context of a primarily undergraduate institution, 
where the primary goal is quality teaching. Other four-year college settings in which quality teaching is a critical component of the 

faculty  reward  system  may  be  able  to  carry  out  this  curriculum  with  very  little  adjustment.  Two-year  college  settings  such  as 
community colleges might be able to use all four elements, but with a less populated “big picture” (recall Figure 3). One open 

question is how Ph.D.-granting universities  can tailor Curriculum Element #1 to their university’s reward system for research-
active faculty; one possibility may be to tie it to their existing BPC efforts to broaden participation in computing. More generally, 

the question of how our results generalize to other kinds of settings remains open. Still, we believe our four educate-the-educators 
curriculum elements, and the mechanisms to carry them out, are generalizable to other contexts. We hope other researchers will 

join us in helping to find out.  

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  

Anonymized for blind review. 

REFERENCES 
[1]  AccessComputing. 2015. Web design & development I. http://www.uw.edu/accesscomputing/webd2/ 

[2]  Manon Arcand and Jacques Nantel. 2012. Uncovering the nature of information processing of men and women online: The comparison of two models using the 

think-aloud method. Journal of Theoretical and Applied Electronic Commerce Research 7, 2 (2012), 106–120. 

[3]  Anne  G.  Applin.  2006.  A 

learner-centered  approach 

to 

teaching  ethics 

in  computing.  ACM  SIGCSE  Bulletin,  38,  1,  530-534.  

https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/1124706.1121505.   

[4]  Brianna Blaser, Katherine M. Steele, and Sheryl E. Burgstahler. 2015. Including universal design in engineering courses to attract diverse students. In 2015 ASEE 

Annual Conference & Exposition. ASEE Conferences, Seattle, Washington. https://www.jee.org/24272. 

[5]  Mark Bond and Barbara B. Lockee. 2018. Evaluating the effectiveness of faculty inquiry groups as communities of practice for faculty professional development. 

Journal of Formative Design in Learning, 2, 1, 1-7. 

[6]  Corinne Brion and Paula A. Cordeiro. 2018. Lessons learned from a training of trainers model in Africa. Journal of Educational Leadership and Policy Studies, 

2, 1. Retrieved from https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ1227037.pdf.  

[7]  B. Bullock, F.L. Nascimento, and S.A. Doore. 2021, March. Computing ethics narratives: Teaching computing ethics and the impact of predictive algorithms. In 

Proceedings of the 52nd ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 1020-1026. https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3408877.3432468  

[8]  Margaret Burnett, Simone Stumpf, Jamie Macbeth, Stephann Makri, Laura Beckwith, Irwin Kwan, Anicia Peters, and William Jernigan. 2016. GenderMag: A 
method  for  evaluating  software’s  gender  inclusiveness.  Interacting  with  Computers  28,  6  (10  2016),  760–787.  https://doi.org/10.1093/iwc/iwv046 
http://arXiv:https://academic.oup.com/iwc/article-pdf/28/6/760/7919992/iwv046.pdf 

[9]  M. Burnett, R. Counts, R. Lawrence, and H. Hanson. 2017. Gender HCl and Microsoft: Highlights from a longitudinal study. In 2017 IEEE Symposium on Visual 

Languages and Human-Centric Computing (VL/HCC). 139–143. https://doi.org/10.1109/VLHCC.2017.8103461 

[10]  E.  Burton,  J.  Goldsmith,  and  N.  Mattei.  2018.  How  to  teach  computer  ethics  through  science  fiction.  Communications  of  the  ACM,  61,  8,  54-64. 

https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/3154485  

[11]  M.E.  Califf  and  M.  Goodwin.  2005.  Effective  incorporation  of  ethics  into  courses  that  focus  on  programming.  ACM  SIGCSE  Bulletin,  37,  1,  347-351. 

https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/1047124.1047464  

[12]  Center 

for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention.  2021.  Understanding 

the  Training  of  Trainers  Model.  Retrieved  August  24,  2021 

from 

https://www.cdc.gov/healthyschools/tths/train_trainers_model.htm  

[13]  Shuo Chang, Vikas Kumar, Eric Gilbert, and Loren G Terveen. 2014. Specialization, homophily, and gender in a social curation site: Findings from Pinterest. In 

Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work & social computing. 674–686. 

[14]  Gary Charness and Uri Gneezy. 2012. Strong evidence for gender differences in risk taking. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 83, 1 (2012), 50–58. 

[15]  Lena Cohen, Heila Precel, Harold Triedman, and Kathi Fisler. 2021. A new model for weaving responsible computing into curses across the CS curriculum. In 

Proceedings of the 52nd ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education. 858–864. 

[16]  M. Cote and A.B. Albu. 2017, July. Teaching computer vision and its societal effects: A look at privacy and security issues from the students’ perspective. In 
from 

2017 
https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content_cvpr_2017_workshops/w16/papers/Albu_Teaching_Computer_Vision_CVPR_2017_paper.pdf   

IEEE  Conference  on  Computer  Vision  and  Pattern  Recognition  Workshops 

(CVPRW),  1378-1386. 

  Retrieved 

IEEE. 

[17]  Sally Jo Cunningham, Annika Hinze, and David M. Nichols. 2016. Supporting gender-neutral digital library creation: A case study using the GenderMag Toolkit. 
In Digital Libraries: Knowledge, Information, and Data in an Open Access Society, Atsuyuki Morishima, Andreas Rauber, and Chern Li Liew (Eds.). Springer 
International Publishing, Cham, 45–50 

[18]  R. Ferreira, R. and M.Y. Vardi.. 2021, March. Deep tech ethics: An approach to teaching social justice in computer science. In Proceedings of the 52nd ACM 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 1041-1047. https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/3408877.3432449  

[19]  Casey  Fiesler,  Natalie  Garrett,  and  Nathan  Beard.  2020.  What  do  we  teach  when  we  teach  tech  ethics?  A syllabi  analysis.  In Proceedings  of  the  51st  ACM 

Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education. 289–295.      

[20]  Colin M. Gray, Shruthi Sai Chivukula, Kassandra Melkey, and Rhea Manocha. 2021. Understanding “Dark” design roles in computing education. In Proceedings 
of the 17th ACM Conference on International Computing Education Research (ICER 2021), August 16–19, 2021, Virtual Event, USA. ACM, New York, NY, 
USA, 14 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3446871.3469754 

[21]  B.J.  Grosz,  D.G.  Grant,  K.  Vredenburgh,  J.  Behrends,  L.  Hu,  A.  Simmons,  and  J. Waldo.  2019.  Embedded  EthiCS:  Integrating  ethics  across  CS  education. 

Communications of the ACM, 62, 8, 54-61. Retrieved from  https://cacm.acm.org/magazines/2019/8/238345-embedded-ethics/fulltext  

[22]  Thomas A Harris. 1967. I’m OK, you’re OK. Random House. 

[23]  C. Hilderbrand, C. Perdriau, L. Letaw, J. Emard, Z. Steine-Hanson, M. Burnett, and A. Sarma. 2020. Engineering gender-inclusivity into software: Ten teams’ 

tales from the trenches. In 2020 IEEE/ACM 42nd International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). 433–444. 

[24]  Margaretha  Vreeburg  Izzo  and  William  M  Bauer.  2015.  Universal  design  for  learning:  Enhancing  achievement  and  employment  of  STEM  students  with 

disabilities. Universal Access in the Information Society 14, 1 (2015), 17–27 

[25]  A. Kezar and S. Gehrke. 2017. Sustaining communities of practice focused on STEM reform. The Journal of Higher Education, 88. 3, 323-349. 

[26]  Amy J Ko, Alannah Oleson, Neil Ryan, Yim Register, Benjamin Xie, Mina Tari, Matthew Davidson, Stefania Druga, and Dastyni Loksa. 2020. It is time for more 

critical CS education. Commun. ACM 63, 11 (2020), 31–33.      

[27]  Lara Letaw, Rosalinda Garcia, Heather Garcia, Christopher Perdriau, and Margaret Burnett. 2021. Changing the online climate via the online students: Effects of 
three curricular interventions on online CS students’ inclusivity. In Proceedings of the 14th ACM Conference on International Computing Education Research 
(ICER 2021), August 16–19, 2021. 18 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3446871.3469742 

[28]  Thomas Mahatody, Mouldi Sagar, Christophe Kolski, State of the art on the Cognitive Walkthrough method, its variants and evolutions, International Journal of 

Human-Computer Interaction, 26 (8), pp. 741-785, 2010.  

[29]  Mozilla Foundation. Responsible Computer Science Challenge. Accessed 9/5/2019. http://responsiblecs.org 

[30]  Alannah Oleson, Christopher Mendez, Zoe Steine-Hanson, Claudia Hilderbrand, Christopher  Perdriau, Margaret Burnett, and Amy J. Ko. 2018. Pedagogical 
content knowledge for teaching inclusive esign. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM Conference on International Computing Education Research (Espoo, Finland) 
(ICER ’18). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 69–77. https://doi.org/10.1145/3230977.3230998 

[31]  Alannah Oleson, Meron Solomon, and Amy J. Ko. Computing students' learning difficulties in HCI education. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on 

Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 1-14. 2020. 

[32]  Susmita Hema Padala, Christopher John Mendez, Luiz Felipe Dias, Igor Steinmacher, Zoe Steine Hanson, Claudia Hilderbrand, Amber Horvath, Charles Hill, 
Logan  Dale  Simpson,  Margaret  Burnett,  Marco  Gerosa,  Anita  Sarma.  2020.  How  gender-biased  tools  shape  newcomer  experiences  in  OSS  projects.  IEEE 
Transactions on Software Engineering (2020).  

[33]  M.S. Peterson. 2014. Public deliberation and practical application of civic engagement through a “train the trainer” process at a historically black college. The 

Journal of Negro Education, 83, 1, 77-92. Retrieved from  https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.7709/jnegroeducation.83.1.0077  

[34]  Cynthia  Putnam,  Maria  Dahman,  Emma  Rose,  Jinghui  Cheng,  and  Glenn  Bradford.  2016.  Best  practices  for  teaching  accessibility  in  university  classrooms: 

cultivating awareness, understanding, and appreciation for diverse users. ACM Transactions on Accessible Computing (TACCESS) 8, 4 (2016), 1–26. 

[35]  Heather L. Reynolds & Katherine Dowell Kearns (2017) A planning tool for incorporating backward design, Active Learning, and Authentic Assessment in the 

College Classroom, College Teaching, 65:1, 17-27, DOI: 10.1080/87567555.2016.1222575 

[36]  J. Saltz, M. Skirpan, C. Fiesler, M. Gorelick, T. Yeh, R. Heckman, N. Dewar, and N. Beard. 2019. Integrating ethics within machine learning courses. ACM 

Transactions on Computing Education (TOCE), 19, 4, 1-26. https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3341164  

[37]  B.R. Shapiro, A. Meng, C. O'Donnell,  C. Lou, E.  Zhao, B.  Dankwa, and A. Hostetler. 2020, April. Re-Shape: A method to teach data ethics for data science 
education. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 1-13. https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3313831.3376251  

[38]  B.R. Shapiro, E. Lovegall, A. Meng, J. Borenstein, and E.  Zegura. 2021, March. Using role-play to scale the integration of ethics across the computer science 
1034-1040. 
Technical 

Proceedings 

Symposium 

Education, 

Computer 

Science 

ACM 

52nd 

the 

on 

In 

of 

curriculum. 
https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3408877.3432525   

[39]  Arun Shekhar and Nicola Marsden. 2018. Cognitive walkthrough of a learning management system with gendered personas. In Proceedings of the 4th Conference 
on  Gender  &  IT  (Heilbronn,  Germany)  (GenderIT  ’18).  Association  for  Computing  Machinery,  New  York,  NY,  USA,  191–198.  https://doi.org/10.1145/ 
3196839.3196869 

[40]  Lee Shulman. 1987. Knowledge and teaching: Foundations of the new reform. Harvard educational review 57, 1 (1987), 1–23.  

[41]  Steven E Stemler. 2004. A comparison of consensus, consistency, and measurement approaches to estimating interrater reliability. Practical Assessment, Research, 

and Evaluation 9, 1 (2004), 4. 

[42]  Simone Stumpf, Anicia Peters, Shaowen  Bardzell, Margaret Burnett, Daniela Busse, Jessica Cauchard, and Elizabeth Churchill. 2020. Gender-inclusive HCI 

research and design: A conceptual review. Foundations and Trends in Human–Computer Interaction 13, 1 (2020), 1–69. 

[43]  The GenderMag Project. GenderMag-Teach. 2021. Accessed 9/7/21. https://sites.google.com/site/gendermagteach/ 

[44]  T.  Trust,  J.P.  Carpenter,  and  D.G.  Krutka,  D.  G.  2017.  Moving  beyond  silos:  Professional  learning  networks  in  higher  education.  The  Internet  and  Higher 

Education, 35, 1-11. 

[45]  Jan H Van Driel, Nico Verloop, and Wobbe De Vos. 1998. Developing science teachers’ pedagogical content knowledge. Journal of Research in Science Teaching: 

The Official Journal of the National Association for Research in Science Teaching 35, 6 (1998), 673–695. 

[46]  Mihaela  Vorvoreanu,  Lingyi  Zhang,  Yun-Han  Huang,  Claudia  Hilderbrand,  Zoe  Steine-Hanson,  and  Margaret  Burnett.  2019. From  gender  biases  to  gender- 
inclusive design: an empirical  investigation. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Glasgow, Scotland Uk) 
(CHI ’19). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300283 

[47]  Annalu Waller, Vicki L Hanson, and David Sloan. 2009. Including accessibility within and beyond undergraduate computing courses. In Proceedings of the 11th 

international ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility. 155–162. 

[48]  Etienne  and  Beverly  Wenger-Trayner.  2015.  Communities  of  practice.  A  brief  introduction.  Retrieved  from:  https://wenger-trayner.com/introduction-to-

communities-of-practice/. 

[49]  Nick Young and Shriram Krishnamurthi. 2021. Early post-secondary student performance of adversarial thinking. In Proceedings of the 14th ACM     Conference 
on  International  Computing  Education  Research  (ICER  2021),  Au-  gust  16–19,  2021,  Virtual  Event,  USA.  ACM,  New  York,  NY,  USA,  12  pages. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3446871.3469743 

21 

 
 
 
 
