2
2
0
2

p
e
S
3
1

]

M

I
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
5
1
1
6
0
.
9
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Review
Software and techniques for VLBI data processing and
analysis

Michael Janssen1* ID , Jack F. Radcliffe2,3,4 ID , Jan Wagner1 ID

1 Max-Planck-Institut für Radioastronomie, Bonn, Germany
2 Department of Physics, University of Pretoria, Lynnwood Road, Hatﬁeld, Pretoria 0083, South Africa
3
4 National Institute for Theoretical and Computational Sciences (NITheCS) South Africa
* Correspondence: mjanssen@mpifr-bonn.mpg.de; Tel.: +49-228-525-431

Jodrell Bank Centre for Astrophysics, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PL, UK

Academic Editor:
Received: date; Accepted: date; Published: date

Abstract: Very-long-baseline interferometry (VLBI) is a challenging observational technique, which
requires in-depth knowledge about radio telescope instrumentation, interferometry, and the handling
of noisy data. The reduction of the raw data is mostly left to the scientists and demands the use of
complex algorithms implemented in comprehensive software packages. The correct application of these
algorithms necessitates a good understanding of the underlying techniques and physics that are at play.
The veriﬁcation of the processed data produced by the algorithms demands a thorough understanding
of the underlying interferometric VLBI measurements. This review describes the latest techniques and
algorithms that scientists should know about when analyzing VLBI data.

Keywords: radio interferometry; polarimetry; astrometry.

1. Introduction

In recent years, several novel techniques and methods have been developed for the processing
and analysis of very-long-baseline interferometry (VLBI) data, related primarily to the new needs and
capabilities of novel VLBI instruments. For instance, the growing number of telescopes participating in
large and global alliances of VLBI arrays [e.g., 1–5], signiﬁcant increases in bandwidths via improved
gigabit per second (Gbps) recording rates [e.g., 6,7], multi-frequency receiver capabilities [e.g., 8],
advancements towards observing increasingly shorter wavelength emission to gain resolving power
and counter self-absorption effects in the observed sources [e.g., 9,10], and prospects of the future
next-generation Very Large Array [ngVLA, 11,12], VLBI capabilities of the Square Kilometre Array
[SKA, 13,14], next-generation Event Horizon Telescope [ngEHT, 15], as well as millimeter space VLBI
observatories [e.g., 16–19].

Lately, the localization of a repeating fast radio burst [20] and black hole images [10,21] have been
continuum total intensity VLBI science highlights. More complex VLBI methods, which require a few
additional steps, enable the study of magnetic ﬁeld signatures through polarized synchrotron radiation,
spectral line emission from astronomical masers, and wide ﬁelds of view (FOVs) combined with the VLBI
resolving power.

With polarimetric VLBI [e.g., 22–26], the role that magnetic ﬁelds play in the acceleration, collimation,
and morphology of active galactic nuclei (AGN) jets can be studied across a wide range of scales. At the
smallest scales, parameters of the central object responsible for producing the jet can be inferred to test

Universe 2022, VLBI Science Applications, accepted for publication; doi:10.3390/——

www.mdpi.com/journal/universe

 
 
 
 
 
 
Universe 2022, VLBI Science Applications, accepted for publication

2 of 39

for the presence of an event horizon, measure the spin of the compact object, and assess the role of the
magnetic ﬁeld in the jet launching.

Through spectral line VLBI [e.g., 27–36], maser emission from star forming regions, H I absorption,
ejected circumstellar envelopes from giant stars, as well as gas in the vicinity of AGN that may be part of
inﬂows or outﬂows can be mapped. Through Doppler shifts, the kinematics and physical conditions of the
sources can be studied. Furthermore, angular-diameter distances to megamaser disk galaxies can be used
for cosmology.

Wide-ﬁeld VLBI [e.g., 37–42] enables powerful astrometric studies, the mapping of distances to
pulsars in our galaxy, and the search for gravitationally lensed radio sources. Moreover, faint sources in
the FOV can be detected, details in large extended structures such as AGN jet hotspots can be imaged
when the instrument’s sensitivity is sufﬁcient, and star formation radio emission can be distinguished
from AGN activity in deep ﬁeld studies.

Additionally, VLBI observations of spacecraft should be mentioned [e.g., 43, and references therein].
With a sufﬁciently stable and strong onboard radio emitter, spacecraft can be tracked with high accuracy,
allowing for a wide range of planetary science applications, gravimetric studies, and tests of general
relativity for example.

In this work, we review the typical sequence of VLBI processing steps and highlight the latest
established open-source software packages and techniques. This information is targeted primarily at
scientists who have obtained data from a VLBI observation and want to get an overview of the available
tools for data processing and scientiﬁc analyses. We focus on the latest state-of-the-art algorithms and
do not give a historical overview. We also do not discuss the scheduling of VLBI observations, which
principal investigators (PIs) should do together with observatories and the help of the SCHED software.1
For a broad theoretical VLBI background, the reader is referred to Thompson et al. [44]. Deﬁnitions of
technical terms used in this work that new VLBI users might be unfamiliar with are given in Table 1.

VLBI measurements with the long baselines of the Low Frequency Array (LOFAR) are also possible,
but require unique calibration strategies that are beyond the scope of this work. For example, due to the
prevalence of direction-dependent effects, very low observing frequencies, and large data volumes. For
details, the reader is referred to Morabito et al. [45].

This review is structured as follows: Section 2 describes the correlation of VLBI data. Section 3 details
the “signal stabilization”, which encompasses all data calibration steps needed before the data can be
averaged in time and frequency. Section 4 outlines the amplitude gain corrections for telescopes that
are needed for a ﬂux density calibration in physical units. Section 5 explains how the sky brightness
distribution of the observed source can be reconstructed from the calibrated data. Section 6 addresses how
special science cases of polarization, spectral line, and wide-ﬁeld VLBI are to be handled. Use-cases and
algorithms for the synthetic generation of VLBI data are given in Section 7. A summary is presented in
Section 8.

List of Abbreviations

AGN
ALMA
ASCII
ASIC
CLEAN

Active galactic nuclei
Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array
American Standard Code for Information Interchange
Application-speciﬁc integrated circuit
Imaging algorithm for an incomplete Fourier coverage

1

http://www.aoc.nrao.edu/software/sched. See also https://github.com/jive-vlbi/sched and https://planobs.jive.eu.

Universe 2022, VLBI Science Applications, accepted for publication

3 of 39

EHT
EVN
EVPA
EOP
FFT
FPGA
FOV
FPT
Gbps
GMVA
GPS
GPU
GRMHD
HPC
IDG
IERS
JIVE

Event Horizon Telescope
European VLBI Network
Electric vector polarization angle
Earth orientation parameter
Fast Fourier transform
Field-programmable gate array
Field of view
Frequency-phase-transfer
Gigabit per second
Global mm-VLBI array
Global Positioning System
Graphics processing unit
General relativistic magnetohydrodynamics
High-performance computing
Image-domain gridder
International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service
Joint Institute for Very Long Baseline Interferometry European Research Infrastructure
Consortium
Korean VLBI Network
Left circularly polarized
Low Frequency Array
Magnetically arrested accretion disc

Multi-frequency synthesis
Message Passing Interface
Multi-scale CLEAN
Multi-source self-calibration

KVN
LCP
LOFAR
MAD
MERLIN Multi-Element Radio Linked Interferometer Network
MFS
MPI
MSC
MSSC
MS-MFS Multi-scale multi-frequency synthesis (combines MSC with MT-MFS)
MT-MFS Multi-term multi-frequency synthesis
ngEHT
ngVLA
NRAO
RCP
RML
PI
PSF
RF
RFI
SANE
SEFD
SFPR
SKA
S / N
TCP
TEC
UDP
UT

Next-generation Event Horizon Telescope
Next-generation Very Large Array
National Radio Astronomy Observatory
Right circularly polarized
Regularized maximum likelihood
Principal investigator
Point spread function
Radio frequency
Radio frequency interference
Standard and normal evolution accretion state
System equivalent ﬂux density
Source frequency phase referencing
Square Kilometre Array
Signal-to-noise ratio
Transmission Control Protocol
Total electron content
User Datagram Protocol
Universal Time

Universe 2022, VLBI Science Applications, accepted for publication

4 of 39

VERA
VGOS
VLA
VLBA
VLBI

VLBI Exploration of Radio Astrometry
VLBI Global Observing System
Very Large Array
Very Long Baseline Array
Very-long-baseline interferometry

Table 1. Basic terms, deﬁnitions, and concepts are listed here, which new VLBI users might be unfamiliar
with or which might have slightly different meanings in other related works.

Name

Meaning

Telescope
frontend

Equipment “directly attached to the front of a telescope”, used to detect and encode the sky signal.
Receivers (e.g., bolometers) are frontend equipment.

Telescope
backend

Equipment at the telescope that is used to process and store the signal from the frontend. Block
Downconverters, which mix the sky signal down to a lower frequency range (heterodyning),
analog-to-digital converters, which digitize the data, and data recorders, which store the digitized
measurements on hard drives, are backend equipment.

Baseband
data

The recorded data at a telescope that will be used for the correlation. More precisely, the ﬁltered,
down-converted, sampled, and quantized electric ﬁeld measurements stored in the backends.

Signal
stabilization

Described in Section 3: The collection of all post-correlation calibration measures, excluding
the a priori ﬂux density calibration (Section 4). The signal stabilization is often referred to as
fringe-ﬁtting, but it also involves additional steps, e.g., corrections for bandpass responses and
corrections for atmospheric phase turbulence.

Delay

Rate

Residual post-correlation phase-slopes as a function of frequency (e.g., due to atmospheric path
length differences). To be corrected in the signal stabilization step.

Residual post-correlation phase-slopes as a function of time (e.g., due to Doppler shifts) To be
corrected in the signal stabilization step.

Fringe-ﬁt
FFT

The fast Fourier transform step of common fringe-ﬁtting algorithms. Transforms the visibilities
from time, frequency space into a rate, delay space, where the peaks are to be found. The height of
the peaks corresponds to the strength of the signal.

Low ν

An observing frequency below 20 GHz.

High ν

An observing frequency above 20 GHz.

Allan
deviation

A measure of frequency stability [46]. An easy-to-follow derivation and description of the Allan
deviation equation is given in Section 9.5.1 of Thompson et al. [44].

VEX ﬁle

FITS-IDI
ﬁle

ANTAB ﬁle

“VLBI EXperiment” ﬁle, which describes the VLBI setups and observing schedules in a standardized
text format (https://vlbi.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/vex-deﬁnition-15b1.pdf).

“FITS Interferometry Data Interchange Convention” standardized ﬁle format for visibility and
VLBI metadata built upon the upon the standard FITS format (https://ﬁts.gsfc.nasa.gov/registry/
ﬁtsidi/AIPSMEM114.PDF).

“Antenna table”, which contains station gain and system temperature information in a simple text
ﬁle format (http://www.aips.nrao.edu/cgi-bin/ZXHLP2.PL?ANTAB).

Universe 2022, VLBI Science Applications, accepted for publication

5 of 39

2. Correlation

PIs are usually provided with correlated data, but it is instructive for scientists to understand the

fundamentals of interferometric observations and upstream processing applied to their data.

There are two types of astronomical interferometers: Connected-element interferometers, and very
long baseline interferometric networks that are used in astronomical and geodetic VLBI observations.
Connected-element arrays can be “phased”, producing beamforming and phased-sum time domain signal
output (e.g., [3,47]). Such phased arrays can participate in VLBI, and are equivalent to a single large dish
with a narrow beam.

For interferometry, the recorded baseband data (Table 1) of all antennas are combined at a “correlator”
computing system. In a connected-element interferometer, telescopes are connected over short (walkable)
distances to a central correlator via RF-over-ﬁber or high speed network links, and share a common
time and frequency standard. The short distances within an array permit very wide baseband signals
(currently up to 64 GHz of bandwidth) from a large number of antennas (currently up to 10,000) to be
transferred and processed at the array correlator in real time. The correlator usually employs hardware
for the signal processing (FPGA, ASIC) due to power efﬁciency and operating cost considerations. With
real-time correlation, the voluminous (often > 10 Tbit/s aggregate) baseband data does not need to be
stored. Only the ﬁnal time averaged data products are kept.

VLBI networks consist of relatively few ((cid:46) 20) telescopes and, unlike in most connected-element
arrays, they are often heterogeneous with different frequency tuning constraints, digital baseband
bandwidths, baseband data formats, and no shared time and frequency standard. The large distances
between telescopes located across the globe and in orbits around the Earth for space VLBI make real-time
data transfer challenging.

Although there are recent VLBI hardware correlators, e.g., the 16-station x 8 Gbps Korean VLBI
Network [KVN, 48–50] and VLBI Exploration of Radio Astrometry [VERA, 51] correlator at the Korea-Japan
Correlation Center [52], software correlators are currently more common. The ﬂexible signal processing in
software can better address possible complications that arise from the heterogenous set of telescopes. In
addition, new observing modes are more rapidly implemented in software correlators.

2.1. Software Correlators

Two typical open source software VLBI correlators are DiFX2 [53,54] and SFXC3 [55]. DiFX has a wide
developer community and user base including the National Radio Astronomy Observatory (NRAO)/Very
Long Baseline Array [VLBA, 56], the Event Horizon Telescope [EHT, 57], and geodetic services. SFXC is
more native to the European VLBI Network [EVN, see 58, and references therein] environment.

Being “embarrassingly parallel”, the correlation process is highly suited for cluster computing.
Recently, graphics processing units (GPUs) are started to be used. One production GPU correlator is
the 6-station x 16 Gbps near-realtime RasFX of the Quasar VLBI network [59,60]. Other GPU-based
VLBI correlators are under development or in a demonstrator stage, including an Extended-KVN GPU
correlator and a possible correlator for VLBI space science [61]. A GPU-accelerated version of DiFX is
under development as well.4

2

3

4

DiFX: https://www.atnf.csiro.au/vlbi/dokuwiki/doku.php/difx/documentation.
SFXC: https://www.jive.eu/jivewiki/doku.php?id=sfxc.
https://adacs.org.au/project/gpu-acceleration-of-the-difx-software-correlator.

Universe 2022, VLBI Science Applications, accepted for publication

6 of 39

2.2. Station Clock Model

13 s/1 s and < 10−

Typically, each VLBI telescope operates its own frequency standard, with an Allan deviation [46,
13 s/100 s to surpass atmospheric turbulence [62,63]. Receivers and
Table 1] of < 10−
backends are locked to the reference, and backends time-tag their digital baseband output data. An
absolute time reference is provided by GPS, with an uncertainty of around
20 ns due to ionospheric
diurnal variation. Possibilities of sharing clock signals over long distances are currently being investigated
[e.g., 63,64].

±

Without a shared clock signal, time-frequency transfer is emulated by a clock model that is applied
at the correlator. The model consists of station clock offsets and drifts over time of the station frequency
standards. Clock offsets are the differences measured between the backend data time-tag and the absolute
Universal Time (UT). Drifts are measured via a continuous comparison against the GPS absolute time,
usually ﬁt to ﬁrst order (linear drift) or sometimes to a higher order (acceleration) in space VLBI [65].

Software correlators tend to be more ﬂexible with their clock models than their hardware counterparts,

handling offsets of several seconds at sub-microsecond granularity, and drifts of 10−

9 s/1 s or larger.

2.3. Processing at the Correlator

The input for the correlator data processing are the baseband signals Er(t) from all telescopes.
Appendix A describes how the recorded data are shipped to the correlation facility. Processing involves
trivial computations at a high data rate. It produces time averaged mutual coherences between pairs of
telescopes, analytically given by

Γr1,r2 (u, v, τ) = lim
∞
→

T

1
2T

(cid:90) T

T

−

Er1 (t)E∗r2

(t

τ)dt ,

−

(1)

at τ = 0, over an integration time T, for telescopes at locations r1 and r2; see also Equation 15.1 in [44].
Coherences between all telescope pairs and across their different spatial separations, or (u, v)-plane spatial
frequencies, are called interferometric “visibilities” (cf. § 4.1 of [44]).

According to the van Cittert-Zernike theorem, these visibilities are the Fourier counterpart of the angular

source brightness distribution, I(l, m), related through

Γr1,r2 (u, v, 0) =

(cid:90) (cid:90)

I(l, m) exp [

−

2πi(ul + vm)] dldm ;

(2)

see Equations 3.7 and 15.7 in [44]. Here, the line-of-sight directions across the brightness distribution of
the sky source are given by the unit vectors (l, m, √1
m2). Visibility data produced by the correlator
can thus be used for Fourier imaging – after a series of calibration steps described in later sections.

−

−

l2

In practice the correlator determines Γr1,r2 (u, v, n∆τ) over a discrete range of time “delay lags”, n∆τ,

or equivalently in the spectral domain, spectral channels N∆ν across the baseband.

2.4. Correlator Delay Model

The correlator attempts to phase-align stations for maximum coherence to occur around τ = 0.
This requires a delay model that includes the station clock models (Section 2.2), and several predicted
geometric and propagation-path-related delays. These stem from observing geometry, Earth orientation,
tidal/loading effects on station coordinates, tropospheric and ionospheric propagation, near-ﬁeld
wavefront and relativistic aberration effects, telescope orbit and orientation parameters for space VLBI,
etc. The delay model can be produced with the common NASA GSFC Calc/Solve package or software
speciﬁc to space VLBI or near objects [65–67].

Universe 2022, VLBI Science Applications, accepted for publication

7 of 39

Observation
at Telescopes

VEX Schedule

Calibration data
Tsys, weather data

Local Freq.&Time Std.
H-maser/other, GPS

Digital Baseband
Samples, Total Power

Data Transfer

Physical Media
Disks via courier

Network File Transfer
UDP (jive5ab, Tsunami),

TCP (rsync, GridFTP, ...)

Correlation

VEX Descriptor
Actual site coordinates,
freq. setups, clocks, ...

CALC Delay Model
Geometric, atmospheric,
EOPs, S/C orbit, ...

Baseband Conﬁg
File locations, formats

Correlation Conﬁg
Time & spectral reso.

Auxiliary Conﬁg
Pulsar ephemeris,
wideﬁeld phase centers,

spectral processing, ...

Correlator
Postprocessing

Convert X,Y→R,L
via ALMA APP QA2,
or EVN self cal.

Visibility formatting
FITS-IDI, HOPS, MS,
incl. calibration tables

PI Data Release
and Archival

v i s i b i l i t y d a t a ﬁ l e s

Figure 1. VLBI observation and data processing. Per-telescope baseband and calibration data are collected
during VLBI observations. Calibration data are bundled with the ﬁnal visibility data release to the PI. Delay
models for far-ﬁeld VLBI are commonly derived via NASA GSFC CALC 9/10, for near-ﬁeld VLBI via c5++ or
others. Dashed boxes indicate optional processing, such as, pulsar processing, space VLBI antenna support,
multi phase center for wide-ﬁeld VLBI, spectral windowing (in SFXC) or custom channelization (zoom
bands in DiFX). Correlation itself can run on hardware ranging from Raspberry PI, HPC clusters, to Cloud
platforms.

The a priori delay model cannot predict all encountered delay components. Visibility data correlated
with a wide enough delay range n∆τ and at sufﬁciently high temporal cadence allow unmodeled delay
residuals, coming from random atmospheric turbulence for example, to be calibrated out via fringe-ﬁtting
(Table 1) during post-processing (Section 3).

2.5. Correlator Parameters

Software correlators such as DiFX and SFXC are highly conﬁgurable and support various science and
observing modes. Basic parameters are the PI-requested integration time and spectral resolution. Several
additional data and settings ﬂow into the correlator conﬁguration, as illustrated in Figure 1.

Universe 2022, VLBI Science Applications, accepted for publication

8 of 39

In general, conﬁguration ﬁles include a VEX ﬁle5 derived from the observing schedule, edited as
necessary to describe the actual rather than nominal frequency setups and baseband data layouts each
station used during the observation.

Depending on correlator features, additional parameters may include, e.g., 1) pulsar ephemeris data
and binning/gating setups, 2) additional interferometric phase centers for wide-ﬁeld VLBI within the
telescopes’ primary beam, 3) settings for baseband spectral slicing or concatenation via DiFX “zoom” and
“output” bands. These special band modes allow uniform-bandwidth visibility data records to be produced
even for VLBI experiments where telescopes had incompatible frequency setups. 4) DiFX can also extract
phase information of phase/pulse cal tone combs in the baseband data, if tones were injected during
the observation. These combs are used for instrumental delay/phase calibration purposes, especially in
geodetic VLBI. (5) At the VLBA, DiFX can extract on/off digital power levels of a synchronously switched
calibration signal and produce continuous system temperature measurements (Section 4). (6) SFXC offers
data windowing or weighted-overlap-add processing, which shape the frequency response of the spectral
channels.

In networks, like the EVN and the VLBA, that observe frequently in standard modes and in a stable
conﬁguration, the preparatory steps and correlation can be largely automated and pipelined. In other
instances and especially when there are technical changes at stations between sessions, or there is no
automated collection of metadata (station clock models, actual tunings, updated coordinates, etc), the
step of preparing initial correlator VEX and conﬁguration ﬁles can involve extensive manual editing. For
VLBI arrays that do not observe regularly with a consistent setup, multiple iterations of re-correlating
plus data inspection on a small subset of scans are usually required, until one arrives at a ﬁnal correlator
conﬁguration.

2.6. Correlator Output

After a correlation run (bottom of Figure 1) the output data are typically converted from a
correlator-native format into the widely adopted FITS-IDI6, Common Astronomy Software Applications
(CASA) Measurement Set (MS)7, Haystack Observatory Postprocessing System (HOPS)/MkIV8, or
vgosDB NetCDF9 visibility data formats. Metadata or single-dish measurements (top of Figure 1) may
further be attached to the visibility data-set as calibration tables. These may include system temperatures,
antenna gain-elevation characteristics, weather data, ﬂagging tables, and phase cal tones.

VLBI arrays typically observe in a circular polarization basis (through the use of quarter-waveplates),
as the calibration of data from linear feeds is coupled to the different feed angle rotations at different
antennas in a complicated way. If observations had some telescopes observing in linear rather than circular
polarization, the visibilities will have a mixed polarization basis, which complicates the analysis of the data
and is not supported by the FITS-IDI format. The VLBI Global Observing System (VGOS), some EVN,
and also (sub)mm-VLBI observations that include the phased Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter
Array [ALMA, 3,68] have to deal with this problem. Before release to the PI, the mixed polarization
visibilities are converted into a purely circular basis with the PolConvert [69]10 program. The conversion
requires telescope D-term and cross-polarization phase and gain characterization (Section 6.1). The ALMA

5

6

7

8

VEX: https://vlbi.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/vex-deﬁnition-15b1.pdf.
FITS-IDI: https://ﬁts.gsfc.nasa.gov/registry/ﬁtsidi/AIPSMEM114.PDF.
CASA MS: https://casa.nrao.edu/Memos/229.html.
HOPS/MKIV: https://www.haystack.mit.edu/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/docs_hops_002_mk4_ﬁles.txt.
vgosDB NetCDF: https://vievswiki.geo.tuwien.ac.at/VLBI-Analysis/Input-data.

9
10 https://github.com/marti-vidal-i/PolConvert.

Universe 2022, VLBI Science Applications, accepted for publication

9 of 39

Phasing Project quality-assurance (QA2) deliverables provide these parameters a priori for ALMA [70].
Alternatively, parameters can be derived from the visibilities themselves, via a PolConvert calibration
pass on unpolarized sources.

3. Signal stabilization

As described above, the correlator delay models are not perfect, which leads to residual delays and
rates being present in the visibility data. Additionally, corrections for atmospheric phase ﬂuctuations and
instrumental bandpasses, where telescopes exhibit phase and amplitude variations over their frequency
response, are usually not applied at the correlator. Post-correlation processing steps are therefore used to
stabilize the source signal, ideally to remove all errors in the data down to the thermal noise. This allows us
to average the data signiﬁcantly in time and frequency, with limits set only by the structure and variability
of the observed source in the presence of thermal noise only. In practice, the signal-to-noise ratio (S / N) of
the data limits the degree to which data errors can be solved for. Without the signal stabilization steps,
baseline-based errors will be frozen into the data due to phase decoherence, delay errors, and imperfect
bandpass responses for example.

Instrumental errors such as amplitude and phase bandpasses, phase and delay offsets between analog
frequency bands, and polarization imperfections of the receivers (Section 6.1), are stable or drift only
slowly over the course of observations. VLBI scans on bright calibrators can thus be used to solve for
these effects. Some telescopes inject and log phase/pulse cal signals into their signal chain (Section 2.5).
These signals appear as weak periodic spectral lines (and should therefore not be used for spectral line
observations) and can be used to estimate instrumental delay errors.

A common fringe-ﬁtting method is to pick a reference station, transform the visibilities on baselines
to that station into the delay-rate space with a fast Fourier transform (FFT), and to pick delay and rate
estimates at the peak location in the two-dimensional FFT space [71]. The delay, rate, and phase is set
to zero for the reference station and the FFT peaks are used as starting guesses for the station-based
delays and rates of all other antennas. Additionally, the FFT S / Ns (Table 1) can serve as a threshold to
distinguish between detections and non-detections. Finally, the data from all baselines on which the source
is detected are used to reﬁne the starting guesses and obtain ﬁnal delay, rate, and phase solutions with a
least-squares solver based on an assumed source model [72]. The default assumption of a point source
models usually does not lead to noticeable errors compared to the thermal noise [73]. Exceptions are highly
sensitive arrays with a low thermal noise or geodesy experiments, where source structures might prevent
reaching the required accuracy on the delays. If necessary, an iterative approach can be employed, where
an image is ﬁrst reconstructed (Section 5) using data calibrated with the assumption of a point source, that
image is then used as source model to fringe-ﬁt the data again, and the data with this improved calibration
is then used to create a ﬁnal image. Alternatively, it is possible, although computationally very expensive,
to solve for the combined fringes and source structure using a Bayesian approach [74].

Unlike instrumental errors, the residual post-correlation delays, rates, and atmospheric phase
ﬂuctuations are source/direction-dependent. In cm-VLBI experiments, atmospheric errors are moderate
and calibration solutions can be transferred from nearby calibrators to the science target. The closer the
calibrator is to the science target, the better are the results; ideally both are within the same telescope
primary beams. If the in-beam calibrator is weak, a “bi-gradient phase referencing” [75] can be employed,
where a further away very bright source is used to detect a closer weak calibrator via phase-referencing,
from which phase-referencing is then used to detect the very weak science target. Two col-linear aligned
calibrators on opposite sides of a target source can be used for an improved correction of atmospheric
errors [76]. With three or more calibrators, a two-dimensional phase screen of the atmosphere can be
corrected for via two-dimensional interpolation of antenna phases using a “MultiView” technique [77,78].

Universe 2022, VLBI Science Applications, accepted for publication

10 of 39

At high observing frequencies, dominant path delay uncertainties are caused by the troposphere. Akin
to geodesy VLBI, “geodetic blocks” of
10 sources can be observed in short succession to accurately
determine the zenith tropospheric delays at each telescope [79]. Phase-referencing allows for astrometric
measurements of the science target with respect to calibrator sources. At mm wavelengths, the science
target itself has to be fringe-ﬁtted and must therefore be bright enough to be detected within atmospheric
coherence times or incoherent averaging has to be used [80].

∼

With multi-frequency receivers, it is possible to transfer phase solutions across bands to extend
the coherence time at the higher frequencies and enable the detection of weaker sources. A simple
frequency-phase-transfer (FPT) removes short-timescale tropospheric phase errors but does not allow for
astrometric source registration. This technique can be combined with a phase-referencing between multiple
targets as “source frequency phase referencing” [(SFPR), 81–84]. SFPR works at mm wavelengths, removes
slowly varying residual ionospheric and instrumental effects not captured by the FPT, enables astrometry,
and allows for longer on-source VLBI scans as well as longer telescope slewing times to calibrator sources
that are further away, since the fast tropospheric phase errors have been removed by the FPT. Rioja and
Dodson [85] provide an outlook of high-precision astrometry measurements that will be enabled with
future instruments and surveys.

The complex post-correlation data in its multi-dimensional polarization (correlation products),
frequency, time, and baseline space has a considerable size and is challenging to handle. Particular
difﬁculties can arise in heterogeneous VLBI arrays, where different stations may require different
treatments, results may be dominated by the measurements (and potential systematics) of the most
sensitive telescope(s), and varying station sensitivities may make a uniform data reduction difﬁcult. For
example, calibration solutions with a high time-and/or frequency resolution can be obtained for the
sensitive telescopes, while large solution windows might be required to accumulate enough S / N for the
less sensitive telescopes, even when all baselines are used. For these considerations, array geometry also
plays an important role; high S / N data from the large scale emission of resolved sources can be obtained
for smaller dishes if they have short baselines to more sensitive telescopes.

Errors in the data, which can typically be traced back to single antennas, are often not trivial to ﬁnd; a
variety of diagnostic tools and visualizations that make different cuts through the data are needed. Some
– but typically not all – errors can be identiﬁed at the signal stabilization step. Appendix B provides an
overview of how bad data can be identiﬁed and dealt with at the different data reduction stages. Calibration
errors are easily baked into the data and can have substantial effects on the ﬁnal scientiﬁc results. A typical
order of VLBI calibration operations are shown in Figure 2. Comprehensive and well-tested software
suites are generally used for the primary calibration steps. The most common software packages are
described below. Note that tools for the ﬂux density calibration (Section 4), imaging (Section 5), as well as
advanced calibration methods for polarimetry (Section 6.1), spectral lines (Section 6.2), and wide ﬁelds of
view (Section 6.3) are implemented in several of these packages.

3.1. AIPS

The Astronomical Image Processing System (AIPS) [86]11 is currently the most-widely used tool
for the post-correlation calibration of VLBI data. The common visibility input data format that is produced
by modern VLBI correlators is FITS-IDI. The calibrated output data are saved as UVFITS12 ﬁle to disk.

11 http://www.aips.nrao.edu.
12 The UVFITS format is following AIPS conventions (ftp://ftp.aoc.nrao.edu/pub/software/aips/TEXT/PUBL/AIPSMEM117.PS),
which can sometimes change. The format is therefore not well deﬁned and different software packages use slightly different
conventions.

Universe 2022, VLBI Science Applications, accepted for publication

11 of 39

Correlation

See Figure 1.

Load visibilities
and metadata

Load everything in the MS format, e.g., source models, ANTAB data, and
weather information.

Diagnostics

Inspect the raw data.

Flagging

Using a priori ﬂags from the correlator and station log ﬁles.

Autocorrelation-
based calibration

Correct sampler thresholds errors (accor) and perform scalar bandpass
correction in the absence of strong radio frequency interference (RFI).

Flux density
calibration

Atmospheric
pre-calibration

Using ANTAB data (Section 4).

Low ν ((cid:46) 20 GHz): total electron content (TEC) ionospheric calibration.
High ν ((cid:38) 20 GHz): Segmented ﬁtting of calibrator phases and rates to
correct troposheric turbulence on short timescales.

Instrumental
calibration

Correct phase and delay offsets between spectral windows, calibrate
complex bandpass response, and solve reference antenna R-L delay. If
the measurements are available, set overall R-L phase and correct leakage.

Fringe-ﬁt

Fringe-ﬁt over scan durations. Low ν: Phase-referencing if needed.
High ν: Additional segmented fringe-ﬁtting in a second stage.

Calibrate
visibilities

Apply all incremental calibration tables.

Diagnostics

Inspect the calibration solutions and the calibrated data.

Data output

Average visibilities in appropriate time and frequency bins. Export the
calibrated data in the MS and/or UVFITS format.

Science

Imaging, model-ﬁtting, data analysis, publication.

Figure 2. Flowchart of typical continuum VLBI data reduction steps shown in the order as implemented in
the rPICARD pipeline (Section 3.2.1). Feed rotation angle effects are calibrated on-the-ﬂy here.

Universe 2022, VLBI Science Applications, accepted for publication

12 of 39

With AIPS, ionospheric corrections based on a priori maps of the global TEC can be applied to the
data for an improved astrometry. Furthermore, the applied fringe corrections from the correlator can
be improved with a posteriori determined IERS Earth Orientation Parameters (EOPs). Finally, pulse cal
signals can be used to calibrate instrumental effects.

Several hundred tasks are available within AIPS, covering all standard data calibration and analysis
steps as well as advanced methods, such as computing the statistics on Allan Variances (ALVPR task),
modeling of a gravitational lenses (GLENS), and optimizing conﬁgurations of telescope arrays (CONFI), to
name a few examples.

The AIPS cookbook13 can serve as a detailed guide to typical VLBI data reduction pathways, where
the needed AIPS tasks and their parameters are described for each step. Additionally, several generically
useful VLBI tips and tricks are given.

3.1.1. ParselTongue

ParselTongue [87]14 is a Python interface for AIPS. It allows the user to run AIPS tasks, access
calibration and visibility data, and to script their data processing. A ParselTongue pipeline is currently
used for EVN pipelining operations.

3.2. CASA

The CASA software [88, Emonts et al. in prep.]15 and its underlying suite of C++ “casacore” libraries
are widely used for the processing of connected-element-interferometer radio data (e.g., from ALMA and
the VLA) and also single-dish radio observations. [e.g., 13,68,89,90]. Initiated by the “BlackHoleCam”
project [91], CASA has been recently upgraded with VLBI capabilities, which are now supported and further
developed by the Joint Institute for VLBI ERIC (JIVE) and NRAO [92]. The input visibility can be in the
native, locally stored MS format or FITS-IDI ﬁles, which will be loaded and converted to a MS. The ﬁnal
calibrated visibilities are stored together with the raw data in the MS and can also be exported as UVFITS
ﬁles.

The CASA calibration framework is based on the Hamaker-Bregman-Sault measurement equation, a
powerful mathematical framework for interferometric calibration problems, including direction-dependent
effects [93–97]. Unlike AIPS, CASA stores the visibility data (in MS format) and calibration tables (in a MS-like
format) separately on disk in the working directories.

The fringe-ﬁtter and all standard CASA tasks can make use of a source model to improve calibration
accuracy. The source model information is stored in the MS when the imaging is done within CASA
(Section 5) or when an external FITS image is loaded. Ionospheric TEC corrections can also be done in
CASA. Additionally, the fringe-ﬁtter has the capability of solving for dispersive delays from the ionosphere.
Development plans for the short-term future include the handling of pulse cal data, an improved
handling of irregularly spaced frequency channels when performing multi-band fringe-ﬁtting, EOPs
correction and a general accountability of the correlator model [92].

The next-generation CASA (ngCASA) project16 will improve the hardware scalability signiﬁcantly,
particularly the speed with which large data volumes from future instruments can be accessed and
processed, by using off-the-shelf Python libraries like Dask [98] and xarray [99].

13 http://www.aips.nrao.edu/cook.html.
14 https://www.jive.eu/jivewiki/doku.php?id=parseltongue:parseltongue.
15 https://casa.nrao.edu.
16 ngCASA: https://pypi.org/project/ngcasa.

Universe 2022, VLBI Science Applications, accepted for publication

13 of 39

3.2.1. rPICARD

CASA has a convenient toolkit for extensive visbility and calibration data access, which allows users to
easily automate their data processing. This led to the development of a generic VLBI calibration pipeline,
the Radboud PIpeline for the Calibration of high Angular Resolution Data (rPICARD), which is
based on CASA [73,100,101]. rPICARD employs ﬂexible calibration strategies that work for any array and
also synthetic VLBI data [102,103].

rPICARD uses MPI for scalability and a custom robust scalar bandpass calibration method. The
ionospheric dispersive delay and Faraday rotation correction is done with standard CASA tasks using
TEC ﬁles from NASA’s Crustal Dynamics Data Information System. Fringe-ﬁtting is done with the CASA
Schwab-Cotton algorithm [72] and a simple single-source phase referencing method is implemented
in rPICARD.
Instrumental phase, delay, and bandpass effects are corrected by utilizing all scans on
calibrator sources. For corrections of atmospheric phase turbulence at high observing frequencies, the
fringe-ﬁtting is done on a segmentation time, which is optimized based on the expected atmospheric
coherence time at the observing frequency and the S / N of the fringe detections. Figure 3 shows this
two-step fringe-ﬁtting approach, where fringe detections are ﬁrst obtained over VLBI scan durations and
residual atmospherically-induced errors are subsequently calibrated out on short segmentation times.

Next to the aforementioned methods, which are implemented through standard CASA methods,
rPICARD also has a few custom capabilities: 1) Exhaustive baseline searches to an arbitrary order are
performed for non-detections to a primary reference antenna [Appendix D in 101]. 2) The same rate
solutions are applied to all polarization channels and a simple nearest-neighbor algorithm is used to
re-reference all fringe solutions to a single antenna for the stability of polarized source signals. 3) Robust
solutions for atmospheric opacities are derived with estimations of the atmospheric temperature from the
ATM software [104].

rPICARD can be obtained from a Bitbucket repository17 and for every version of the pipeline, Docker
and Singularity containers are available (details are given in the README ﬁle of the pipeline repository).

3.2.2. VPIPE

The VLBI PIPEline (VPIPE) pipeline is an end-to-end CASA-based VLBI pipeline designed for
It currently supports the EVN, VLBA and LBA networks.
mid-frequency (
The pipeline employs similar steps to the rPICARD pipeline (§ 3.2.1) including TEC corrections, phase
referencing via fringe ﬁtting, and self-calibration.

GHz) observations18.

∼

Originally designed for the high data volumes associated with wide-ﬁeld VLBI data (typically
10–50 TB), the pipeline utilises MPI-CASA and HPC parallelism provided by cluster scheduling software,
such as SLURM and PBS Pro, for enhanced scalability. This allows the pipeline to process data quickly
and efﬁciently, and permit the processing of “multiple phase centre observing” correlated data within
short timescales (see § 6.3) [54]. VPIPE is designed to be highly modular and supports containerization
technologies, such as Singularity. This enables the user to easily add extra processing/analysis steps
that uses custom scripts or software packages.

The pipeline incorporates advanced direction-dependent calibration steps needed for wide-ﬁeld VLBI
data. These include multi-source self-calibration (MSSC; see § 6.3), and primary beam correction schemes.
This can be conducted in the (u, v) or image plane. Correcting for these allows the pipeline to reduce noise

17 https://bitbucket.org/M_Janssen/picard.
18 https://github.com/jradcliffe5/VLBI_pipeline.

Universe 2022, VLBI Science Applications, accepted for publication

14 of 39

Figure 3. Example fringe solution diagnostics from rPICARD of M87 observed at 43 GHz with the VLBA
(project code BW0106). Dashed lines show scan boundaries. Crosses and circles correspond to RCP and
LCP, respectively. Top: Gross per-scan solutions. Bottom: Residual atmospheric corrections on adaptive
segmentation timescales after the solutions from the top panel have been applied to the data.

0250500S/N0.000.150.30Rate[psec/sec]-2.00-1.000.00Delay[nsec]03/2204/0004/0104/0304/0504/07Day/hour (Jun 03, 2013)1500150Phase[deg]060120S/N-1.500.001.50Rate[psec/sec]-0.150.00Delay[nsec]03/2204/0004/0104/0304/0504/07Day/hour (Jun 03, 2013)1500150Phase[deg]Universe 2022, VLBI Science Applications, accepted for publication

15 of 39

levels, improve the dynamic range, increase the effective ﬁeld-of-view, and ensure consistent ﬂux density
scales across the primary beam.

3.2.3. The e-MERLIN CASA Pipeline

The e -MERLIN CASA Pipeline (eMCP) is a Python pipeline that is designed for use with e-MERLIN
data19. It currently supports continuum and spectral line observations. The pipeline uses CASA-based VLBI
tools, such as baseline and global fringe-ﬁtting routines, to perform phase-referencing and self-calibration
with parameters that are tailored for the e-MERLIN array and the observing frequency. The pipeline
adopts other software tools such as AOFlagger [105]20 and WSClean [106]21 to address the challenging RFI
environment and large image sizes often required.

Since 2019, eMCP has been incorporated as the ofﬁcial pipeline for the processing and delivery of
e-MERLIN data to the users. As a result, it contains a suite of advanced quality assessment tools, displayed
through a web-interface, that permit the user easily assess the quality of the calibration and images of the
science targets.

3.2.4. JIVE EVN continuum Jupyter notebooks

EVN users are provided with a ParselTongue-based pipeline-calibrated version of their data by JIVE.
Additionally, a CASA-based pipeline for EVN continuum is under development at JIVE, which will run in a
Jupyter notebook [92,107]22 With this notebook, users will be able to start with a default set of parameters
and steps used to calibrate EVN data, which can then be adjusted and reﬁned to produce science-ready
data.

3.3. EHT-HOPS

HOPS23 is a collection of basic VLBI functions like fringe-ﬁtting, which are sufﬁcient for the current
needs of geodetic analyses [108]. However, HOPS is not as ﬂexible as AIPS and CASA and lacks a few
capabilities, which prevents a full scientiﬁc data analysis. The missing features will be implemented in an
updated next-generation HOPS (ngHOPS) software package.

In the meantime, an “EHT-HOPS” [73,109] pipeline has been designed, which augments HOPS with
custom Python scripts24 to enable the full reduction of data from the EHT and Global mm-VLBI Array
(GMVA) when ALMA is participating in the observations [73,110]. A least-squares solver is used to ﬁnd
station-based delay and rate solutions from the baseline-based estimates that HOPS can solve for [71]. High
S / N detections on bright calibrators are used to solve for bandpass effects. A piece-wise polynomial phase
model is ﬁtted directly to the visibilities to correct for atmospheric phase turbulence. To avoid over-ﬁtting,
phase corrections for each spectral window are obtained from a ﬁt to all other spectral windows in the
data. Relative complex gains between polarization channels are ﬁtted to facilitate polarimetric analyses.

EHT-HOPS and rPICARD are used to produce science-ready data from the EHT [73,111–113].

19 https://github.com/e-merlin/eMERLIN_CASA_pipeline.
20 https://gitlab.com/aroffringa/aoﬂagger.
21 https://gitlab.com/aroffringa/wsclean.
22 https://code.jive.eu/bemmel/EVN_CASA_pipeline. See also https://www.evlbi.org/evn-data-reduction-guide.
23 https://www.haystack.mit.edu/haystack-observatory-postprocessing-system-hops.
24 https://github.com/sao-eht/eat.

Universe 2022, VLBI Science Applications, accepted for publication

16 of 39

Figure 4. Example of effective (opacity-corrected) system temperatures measured by three VLBA antennas
from observations of M87 at 43 GHz (project code BW0106). Pie Town system temperatures show slight
increases at the beginning and end of the observing track, where the source is at a low elevation. The source
sets at the end of the track for the North Liberty station, which causes an increases in system temperature.
Bad weather is responsible for the highly variable system temperature measurements at Saint Croix.

3.4. PIMA

PIMA [114]25 is a specialized data reduction program, which can be used to accurately distinguish
fringe detections from non-detections. PIMA is primarily employed for space VLBI experiments, because
its fringe-ﬁtter can solve for an acceleration (second-order rate) term. As space VLBI is beyond the scope
of this work, we will not consider PIMA further.

4. Flux density calibration

After the signal stabilization, the correlation coefﬁcients in units of thermal noise are normalized to
unity autocorrelations and scaled corresponding to idealized analog correlation amplitudes. Ignoring
baseline-dependent amplitude losses (such as de-correlation from data averaging), visibilities
Vij can be
obtained in ﬂux density units of Jansky (Jy) by calibrating the complex correlation coefﬁcients rij of the
baseline connecting stations i and j with the a priori estimated system equivalent ﬂux density (SEFD)
sensitivities of our antennas,

Vij =

(cid:113)

1
ηQ

SEFDiSEFDjeτi+τj rij .

(3)

Here, ηQ is a correction factor for the digital quantization efﬁciency [44]; for 2-bit sampling, we have ηQ ≈
0.88. To correct for atmospheric attenuation of ground-based millimeter and submillimeter observations
Vij “above the atmosphere”, eτ correction factors are applied. Here, τi is the mean
and thereby measure
atmospheric opacity along the line of sight signal path of antenna i.

25 http://astrogeo.org/pima.

2223000102030405060708UT hour on June 3rd, 201302004006008001000System temperature [K]Saint CroixNorth LibertyPie TownUniverse 2022, VLBI Science Applications, accepted for publication

17 of 39

The SEFDs are based on measured system temperatures Tsys, the telescope gain

as a function of
elevation, and the phasing efﬁciency ηph for phased arrays: SEFD ∝ η−
1Tsys. Hot-load calibration
scans measure the effective system temperature Tsyseτ directly and thereby immediately satisfy Equation 3
[115]. For noise-diode-based Tsys measurements, τ must be estimated after the fact. A common approach
τ) Tatm, where Trx and Tatm are the
is to ﬁrst approximate the system temperature as Tsys (cid:39)
two dominant noise terms, corresponding to receiver and atmospheric temperatures, respectively. Then,
Trx is estimated by extrapolating Tsys to zero airmass and an atmospheric model is used to estimate Tatm
from weather parameters measured at the telescope. The Tsys measurements themselves can subsequently
be used to estimate τ [Section 4.3 in 101]. Examples of opacity-corrected system temperatures are shown
in Figure 4.

1
ph G −

Trx + (1

e−

−

G

The calibration metadata, gathered as a priori gain and system temperature information from all
telescopes, are commonly stored in simple ASCII text ﬁles following the ANTAB format26. Note that invalid
entries are often marked with a value of 999 or
999. Auxiliary weather information that might be needed
to estimate Tatm for an opacity correction is usually attached to the visibility data format. Otherwise, it can
be loaded from an ASCII text ﬁle (by AIPS and rPICARD as described in [101]).

−

4.1. Software implementations

AIPS, CASA/rPICARD, and EHT-HOPS post-processing scripts can be used to extract SEFDs from ANTAB
tables and subsequently perform the a priori ﬂux density calibration. AIPS reads external calibration
information with the ANTAB task and creates SEFD calibration tables with APCAL, optionally with a simple
ﬁt for additional atmospheric opacity corrections.27 Here, the measured ambient temperature Tamb is
used to estimate the sky temperature via Tatm = 1.12Tamb −
50 K. CASA and rPICARD use custom Python
modules28 to load the ANTAB data if it is not already attached to the FITS-IDI ﬁles. The CASA task gencal
is used to create SEFD calibration tables (separately for telescope gains and system temperatures). With
a custom module, rPICARD can perform a robust atmospheric opacity correction for a user-speciﬁed
selection of antennas. Here, the ATM code [104] is used to ﬁnd Tatm. The EHT Analysis Toolkit provides
post-processing scripts for the ﬂux density calibration of EHT-HOPS data.

4.2. Advanced methods based on array redundancy and a priori source assumptions

• A network calibration [73,109] can be employed if the unresolved ﬂux density on large scales seen by
short baselines in the VLBI array is known. The method only works for telescope sites that are close
enough (almost co-located or in “walking distance”) to effectively form a zero-baseline interferometer.
The ﬂux density measurement used to calibrate the gains can be obtained from (quasi-)simultaneous
single-dish or connected-element-interferometry observations and allows for an absolute amplitude
calibration. A least-squares approach with all baselines to pairs of redundant sites are used to
robustly constrain the gains of the two neighboring antennas. A convenient implementation of the
network calibration method can found in the eht-imaging software (Section 5.1.5).

• Cross-track calibration [116] is based on the fact that redundant baselines anywhere in the (u, v)-space
should measure the same source properties modulo intrinsic source variability. A threshold can be
set for how close two baselines should be to be considered identical, given how “quickly” the source
structure varies in the Fourier space. Baselines might cross within a small region or stay closely
parallel for long (u, v)-tracks. Network calibration is a special case of the cross-track calibration,

26 ANTAB: http://www.aips.nrao.edu/cgi-bin/ZXHLP2.PL?ANTAB.
27 https://library.nrao.edu/public/memos/vlba/sci/VLBAS_01.pdf.
28 https://github.com/jive-vlbi/casa-vlbi.

Universe 2022, VLBI Science Applications, accepted for publication

18 of 39

where a known total ﬂux density can be used for an absolute gain calibration. Generally, we have
no a priori knowledge about the resolved source structure at larger (u, v)-spacings. Here, the
least-squares solver can be used for all redundant baselines to tighten the gains of the involved
stations by constraining the amplitude ratio of crossing-track baselines to unity. In absence of
accurate and independent ﬂux density information, the product of the solved gains are enforced to be
unity to only solve for relative gains without adjusting the total ﬂux density. Within AIPS, the UVCRS
task can be used as a diagnostic tool to identify anomalous gains of stations that are involved in
crossing (u, v)-tracks. The only real cross-track calibration method implementation, that the authors
are aware of, is the UVCROSS Caltech VLBI Analysis Program [117].29

• Second-moment source size calibration [118] can be employed under the assumption that the short
baselines in the array sample a simple large-scale source structure such as a Gaussian. From the
assumed large-scale image, model amplitudes can be computed and gains from the stations connected
by short baselines can be obtained by self-calibration (Section 5). For a single baseline, a common
application is to keep the gains ﬁxed for the station which has the more accurate SEFD-based a
priori ﬂux density calibration. This method can be employed by all imaging software packages’
self-calibration routines. A convenient implementation can be found in eht-imaging.

5. Imaging and geometric model-ﬁtting

When imaging VLBI data, one tries to reconstruct the sky brightness distribution that ﬁts the data best
and satisﬁes additional assumptions imposed to deal with the ill-posed imaging problem of incompletely
sampled Fourier data from a sparse array. Strictly speaking, “imaging” refers to obtaining a pixel-based
model (convolved with a resolving beam) through inverse modeling or forward modeling [119]. Inverse
modeling techniques like the CLEAN algorithm [120,121] gradually reconstruct a model in the image
domain of the inverse Fourier transform of the visibilities. There are a couple of different CLEAN
implementations in different software packages that are worth mentioning. The original Högbom CLEAN
method [120] uses iterations of delta image model components convolved with the point spread function
(PSF) that are subtracted from the “dirty” image of the inverse Fourier transform. The process converges
when the residual map consists only of noise. The collection of delta components form the ﬁnal image
model. When the residual image is added and the delta components are convolved with the VLBI resolving
beam, the ﬁnal image is obtained. Knowledge about interferometric images is needed to identify “false”
sidelobe emission regions and to put boxes (“CLEAN windows”), which limit the locations in which
CLEAN can put delta components: the emission peaks within the CLEAN windows. Clark [121] invented
a faster variant of the Högbom CLEAN for large images. Clark CLEAN operates in two cycles; the minor
cycle works like the Högbom CLEAN, except that only the inner “beam patch” of the PSF is used. In major
cycles, the collection of delta components are then subtracted with the full PSF. Multi-scale CLEAN [MSC,
122] allows the use of extended Gaussian components for the model next to the delta components. This
proved to be useful in accurately deconvolving extended / diffuse emission.

These techniques used to average the frequency bandwidth into a single channel to improve S / N.
However, the development of multi-frequency synthesis [MFS, 123–125] allowed the gridding of visibilities
measured across multiple frequencies onto the same (u, v) plane, thus improving the ﬁdelity of the resultant
image. With the widening bandwidths of modern instruments, the in-band source spectral indices limited
the deconvolution accuracy when using MFS. To solve this, the multi-term multi-frequency synthesis
[MT-MFS, 126] algorithm models the frequency dependence of the source using a Taylor expansion.

29 The Caltech VLBI Analysis Programs (https://sites.astro.caltech.edu/~tjp/citvlb) have been discontinued and are therefore not

considered further in this work.

Universe 2022, VLBI Science Applications, accepted for publication

19 of 39

Figure 5. VLBI image reconstruction and underlying visibility amplitude data reproduced from Janssen
et al. [112]. The results are from EHT observations of Centaurus A in 2017 at 228 GHz. The image shown in
the left panel was reconstructed with the eht-imaging regularized maximum likelihood method. The right
panel shows the visibility amplitudes as a function of (u, v)-distance projected along the jet direction (top)
and perpendicular (bottom) to the jet direction.

These various algorithms can be used in combination with each other depending on the observational
conﬁguration and source structures. For example, the Multi-scale multi-frequency synthesis [MS-MFS,
126] combines MSC with MT-MFS.

Forward modeling techniques such as the maximum entropy method [127] ﬁt the Fourier transform
of an image to the visibility data. Additional assumptions can be incorporated as regularizers. Fitting of
geometric forms such as two-dimensional Gaussian components are also done with the forward modeling
approach in the visibility domain. Figure 5 shows an example VLBI image reconstruction together with the
underlying visibility amplitude measurements. Projected along the jet direction, the visibility amplitudes
are indicative of a smooth Gaussian-like structure. Perpendicular to the jet direction, bounding amplitudes
are indicative of strong intensity gradients across the transverse jet proﬁle.

While the VLBI scientiﬁc analysis is usually performed in the image domain, it is also possible to
compare physics-based theoretical source models directly to the visibility measurements. The direct
data-model comparison method will likely become more prominent in the future with the availability of
increasingly advanced AGN jet models[e.g., see 128, for a recent review] and machine learning methods
[129,130]. For the analysis of M87* and Sgr A* EHT observations, horizon-scale simulations [119] are
directly compared to the visibility data with (proprietary) software packages such as GENA [131] and THEMIS
[132].

Cen A: EHT (1.3mm)70 as550 rg1.01.52.02.53.03.5BrightnessTemperature(109K)01234567845◦projecteddistance(Gλ)10−310−210−1100VisibilityAmplitude(Jy)012345678−45◦projecteddistance(Gλ)10−310−210−1100VisibilityAmplitude(Jy)Universe 2022, VLBI Science Applications, accepted for publication

20 of 39

Speciﬁc combinations of the baseline-based visibilities can be formed as “closure quantities”, where
station-based data errors drop out [133–136]. For example, the sum of baseline phases in a closed triangle
form a robust closure phase. While uncorrected residual gain errors negatively impact reconstructed
images when the full set of visibilities are utilized, with only closure quantities, one does not make use
of the full information content of the data. All imaging software packages listed below (Section 5.1)
are able to perform self-calibration, where, for sufﬁciently bright sources, within given solution intervals,
per-station phase and/or amplitude gains can be found with a least-squares solver based on a comparison
between the observed data and model visibilities. Typically, an initial self-calibration is performed based
on a simple starting model or an initial image reconstruction where only closure quantities have been
used. Subsequently, one can iteratively image and self-calibrate until the gain solutions are converged.
This method of solving for the observed source structure together with calibration gains is referred to as
“hybrid-mapping” [137,138].

All imagers listed below can make use of the UVFITS visibility data format as input and produce FITS
images as output. Full Stokes polarimetric imaging can be done with each imager. For details, the reader
is referred to [139, and Martí-Vidal et al., in prep.].

5.1. Software implementations

5.1.1. AIPS

The AIPS IMAGR task implements the Clark CLEAN method.

5.1.2. CASA

The CASA tclean task implements the Högbom, Clark, MSC, and MS/MT-MFS deconvolver options
for CLEAN. Next to UVFITS input, the CASA imager works with its native MS visibility and metadata ﬁle
format.

CASA is commonly used for spectral-line and wide-ﬁeld observations, for which the corresponding

special tclean features are described in Section 6.2 and Section 6.3, respectively.

5.1.3. Difmap

Difmap [140]30 is a widely used VLBI imaging and geometric model ﬁtting software owing to its
computational efﬁciency, intuitive user interface, and convenient data plotting plus ﬂagging procedures.
Difmap implements Högbom CLEAN.

5.1.4. WSClean

WSClean [106]31 has been developed with the primary goal of computationally efﬁcient wide-ﬁeld
imaging, for which the corresponding special software features are descried in Section 6.3. The latest
version of the software can use the Clark CLEAN implementation and reconstruct MS-MFS images
computationally more efﬁcient than tclean [141].

WSClean uses the MS ﬁle format. UVFITS input can easily be converted with the CASA importuvfits

task.

ftp://ftp.astro.caltech.edu/pub/difmap/difmap.html.

30
31 https://gitlab.com/aroffringa/wsclean.

Universe 2022, VLBI Science Applications, accepted for publication

21 of 39

5.1.5. eht-imaging

The eht-imaging software package [142,143]32 is a collection of Python modules for VLBI data
analysis, with a focus on regularized maximum likelihood (RML) imaging. It includes routines for detailed
mock data simulation, gain and polarimetric calibration of visibilities, image and data plotting and
statistical analysis, and RML image reconstruction as well as geometric model ﬁtting from visibilities and
closure products (including full-Stokes and multi-frequency data).

5.1.6. SMILI

SMILI [144,145]33 is a collection of sparse sampling RML forward modeling libraries, similar to

eht-imaging. SMILI can be used through a Python interface.

5.1.7. UVMULTIFIT

UVMULTIFIT [146]34 is a ﬂexible based geometric model ﬁtting library that is integrated in the CASA

ecosystem.

5.1.8. Comrade and DPI

The Julia-based [147] Comrade [148] and Python-based Deep Probabilistic Imaging/Inference
[DPI/α-DPI, 149,150] frameworks are versatile geometric model ﬁtting tools, which are used by the EHT
[151].

6. Advanced scientiﬁc applications

6.1. Polarization calibration

For polarization considerations, we consider the sky signal to be split into independent right-handed
and left-handed circular polarizations (RCP and LCP, respectively). Such a signal split is commonly
obtained in VLBI receiving systems by placing quarter-waveplates in front of linear polarization feeds.
Advanced calibration methods, that have traditionally been developed for the inclusion of ALMA in VLBI
experiments [69], enable routine conversions of recorded linear polarization signals to circular ones during
correlation (Section 2).

6.1.1. Additional polarization signal stabilization steps

The ﬁrst step is to properly align the RCP and LCP signals. The geometric feed rotation angle
evolution between the RCP and LCP data (commonly referred to as parallactic angle rotation) depends
on a telescope’s focus and mount conﬁguration [e.g., see Appendix C of 101] and is usually taken out
when the data are fringe-ﬁtted (Section 3).35 When all RCP and LCP fringe solutions are (re-)referenced
to a common station in a stable system, a global cross-hand R-L delay will be present in the data. This
is the instrumental delay between the RCP and LCP signal chains of the chosen reference station, that
can be determined by fringe-ﬁtting the RL and LR visibilities. The R-L phase is similarly affected by
instrumental effects of the reference station. The true absolute R-L phase sets the orientation of the electric

32 https://github.com/achael/eht-imaging.
33 https://github.com/astrosmili/smili.
34 http://mural.uv.es/imarvi/docums/uvmultiﬁt.
35 Note that the telescope focus and mount conﬁguration information are not always correctly speciﬁed in the visibility data ﬁles
produced by the correlators. For all software packages described here, there are methods to overwrite this information manually.

Universe 2022, VLBI Science Applications, accepted for publication

22 of 39

vector polarization angle (EVPA) of the polarized radio emission, which has to be bootstrapped from other
(e.g., single-dish) observations.

If the fringe-ﬁtting is done separately for RCP and LCP, the R-L alignment can be done as ﬁnal
calibration step. If polarizations are combined for the fringe-ﬁtting, the alignment should be done as part
of the instrumental calibration steps (Figure 2).

6.1.2. Solving for polarization leakage effects

Subsequently, the mutual leakage of signals between the RCP and LCP signal paths at every station
should be calibrated. If left uncorrected, these leakages or “D-terms” will impose small errors in total
intensity data and add polarization signals that are purely instrumental (i.e., Stokes
signals can
occur for unpolarized sources). D-terms can have a frequency dependence, are usually stable in time, and
small enough that the signal stabilization calibration does not have to be revised with leakage-corrected
visibilities. Before leakages can be determined, a good image (Section 5) of the observed source is required.
Firstly, to have gain errors removed by self-calibration and secondly, because solving for D-terms for
resolved sources with complex polarization structures is not trivial [139]. For a thorough and recent
overview of D-term calibration methods and software implementations, the reader is referred to [139, and
Martí-Vidal et al., in prep.].

and

Q

U

6.1.3. Circular polarization

V

For Stokes

studies of VLBI data in a circular polarization basis, self-calibration solutions obtained
from the RR and LL visibilities are needed to estimate the relative R/L amplitude gains of every antenna
source polarization will confound the true residual
in the array. The problem is that an intrinsic Stokes
V
R/L gains. A common remedy is to plan an observation where R/L gains from many observed sources
= 0 on average for the sample, as
based on Stokes
there is no intrinsic preference for positive or negative intrinsic circular polarization, the mean R/L gains
should be applied to the data [152].

images can be obtained. Under the assumption that

V

I

6.2. Spectral line observations

For telescopes equipped with spectrometers and a sufﬁcient frequency resolution set at the correlator,

emission and absorption features from spectral lines can be studied.

6.2.1. Spectral line signal stabilization

For spectral line observations, a few special considerations and adjustments of certain steps have
to be taken into account for the signal stabilization [e.g., 153]. Fringe-ﬁt delay solutions and bandpass
corrections should be obtained only on continuum sources. Depending on the reference frame used during
correlation, Doppler shifts of spectral lines have to be corrected to keep the position of the line constant
with respect to the correlated frequency channels after delays and the bandpass have been corrected.
The center of the Earth is usually chosen as reference point during correlation and small corrections that
are common for all antennas due to the Earth’s orbit around the Sun relative to the observed source are
applied when shifting to the Local Standard of Rest. Such effects become increasingly relevant for longer
observations. Fringe rates can be determined on the science target, selecting one or a few channels with
strong line emission. Strong line emission can also be used for phase-referencing.

The AIPS and CASA fringe-ﬁtting tasks are able to handle spectral line observations. The Doppler
shifts can be corrected with the combined SETJY and CVEL tasks in AIPS and the mstransform task in CASA.
The CASA imager is able to reconstruct spectral cubes (Section 5).

Universe 2022, VLBI Science Applications, accepted for publication

23 of 39

6.2.2. Template spectrum ﬂux density calibration

Bright lines will show up in telescope’s auto-correlation spectra, exceeding the atmospheric noise. A
template spectrum can be obtained from the measured bandpass-corrected total power response of the line
from a sensitive antenna in the VLBI array. Amplitude gains in the form of time-dependent SEFDs can
then be obtained without using system temperatures (Section 4) by ﬁtting the total power spectral of all
antennas to the template [154, Lecture 12].

This calibration method is implemented in the AIPS task ACFIT.

6.2.3. Spectral line imaging

For spectral lines, the self-calibration is best performed with the peak line emission channel(s) image.
Subsequently, spectral cube images can be made from the channels/velocities where line emission is
present. If necessary, CASA tclean can perform Doppler tracking to keep the positions of spectral lines
stable in the Kinematic Local Standard of Rest. For an example of a particularly extensive spectral line
VLBI imaging work, the reader is referred to Matthews et al. [155].

6.3. Wide-ﬁeld VLBI

In wide-ﬁeld VLBI experiments, multiple sources are observed within single pointing ﬁelds that cover

the full or a signiﬁcation fraction of the participating telescopes’ primary beams.36

6.3.1. Wide-ﬁeld correlation

For us to observe sources across the entire primary beam using VLBI, we require correlation to
be conducted at a very high time (typically millisecond) and frequency (
kHz) resolutions in order to
restrain smearing at the edge of the primary beam. However, the result is that a single large and often
unwieldy data-set is produced which makes calibration, imaging and subsequent analysis difﬁcult without
signiﬁcant computing resources. This method has been used for many of the early wide-ﬁeld VLBI
experiments [e.g., 157] but the computational complexity and correlation resources to map the entire
primary beam made wide-ﬁeld VLBI observations an unattractive concept.

∼

An alternative correlation method for wide-ﬁeld VLBI was developed with the DiFX software
correlator [158] and has been implemented in the JIVE SFXC correlator [55]. Named “multiple simultaneous
phase centre observing”, this uses a two-step correlation approach. Firstly, an internal wide-ﬁeld correlation
produces data at the required time and frequency resolution to restrain smearing to acceptable levels at
the edge of the primary beam. These data are copied and phase rotated to multiple positions across the
primary beam FOV, which retains high precision astrometry as an internal geometric delay model within
the correlator applies the required phase rotation. Each of these data-sets, which are centered at different
positions, are then averaged to coarse time and frequency resolution, producing multiple pencil-beam data
sets across the primary beam. These pencil-beams can be arranged to cover multiple sources discovered
in accompanying low-resolution surveys or be mosaicked to cover a region of interest or even the whole
primary beam FOV. The result from this mode of correlation is multiple small and manageable data-sets
(often

GB-sized), one for each position.

∼

36 See Strom [156] for the primary beam of a heterogeneous interferometer array.

Universe 2022, VLBI Science Applications, accepted for publication

24 of 39

6.3.2. Wide-ﬁeld signal stabilization

Signal stabilization steps (Section 3) can be applied to wide-ﬁeld observations as usual, by applying
the calibration solutions to the data from all phase centers. Calibrator sources may be found within
the phase centers as in-beam calibrators or from another area of the sky covered in a different pointing
direction.

6.3.3. Wide-ﬁeld imaging: primary beam correction, the w term, and multi-source phase self calibration

When the beams of the participating telescopes are well determined, primary beam corrections can
be employed across the FOV. For homogeneous arrays, such as the VLBA, the primary beam effectively
adjusts the ﬂux densities with distance from the pointing centre as each baseline sees the same apparent
sky brightness distribution that is modiﬁed by the primary beam power envelope37.

However, most VLBI arrays contain heterogeneous elements, meaning that the primary beam has
signiﬁcant effect even within the main lobe of the primary beam. This manifests in the data as a
direction-dependent and antenna-independent gain error [see Radcliffe et. al. in prep.]. Corrections
for this effect must be conducted in the (u, v)-plane and can be achieved in two ways. The ﬁrst is
to produce a direction-independent gain table with the corrections corresponding to the phase centre
position (implemented through the task CLVLB in AIPS and internally within the VPIPE pipeline). This is
computationally inexpensive, can account for the frequency and time dependence of the primary beam,
and can be applied together with the phase-referencing corrections.

The second method is to correct during the gridding of the image reconstruction using the convolution
of the complex conjugates of the primary beam voltage responses. This is more computationally complex
but any residual errors are only dependent upon the accuracy of the primary beam models. Prototypes
have been implemented in WSClean through the image-domain gridder (IDG) [159] through the application
of a direction-dependent diagonal gain correction [see Radcliffe et al. in prep.].

This correction is applied together with corrections for a non-negligible w term [44] that causes
increasingly larger errors in images with distance from the phase center due to sky curvature and
non-coplanar baselines. Due to the w term, the Fourier-transform between the visibilities and the sky
brightness distribution is no longer two-dimensional. A full three-dimensional FFT would result in strong
aliasing along the w direction and a direct transform along w is computationally too expensive for a cube
that is mostly devoid of emission.

The w term effects are typically corrected with one of the following methods:

• Faceting [160] performs a 2D Fourier-transform for a number of different phase centers across the
FOV. The resultant pieces of image facets are small enough that the 2D FFT approximation works.
The facets are stitched together and deconvolved.
• w-projection [161] uses the fact that the visibility

as a function of w can be calculated from

(u, v, w) = (cid:101)G(u, v, w)
w = 0 through a convolution operation:
V
(cid:104)
√1
the Fourier transform of G(u, v, w) = exp
−
faceting because the visibilities need to be gridded only once.

2πiw

−

−

l2

m2

∗ V
−

V
(cid:16)

at
(u, v, w = 0). Here, (cid:101)G(u, v, w) is
. This method is faster than
1

(cid:17)(cid:105)

V

• w-stacking [106] uses a w-dependent grid which is FFT’ed for each gridded w value and phase-shifted
1(u, v, w). For imaging, all grids are summed with appropriate scaling factors [see 106,
by G−
for details]. Compared to w-projection, w-stacking is faster when the visibility gridding is
computationally more expensive than the FFT computations.

37 We note that this is not strictly the case outside the main primary beam lobe, especially for non-equatorial mounts, where the

different parallactic angles at each antenna results in different side-lobe structure.

Universe 2022, VLBI Science Applications, accepted for publication

25 of 39

WSClean implements the w-stacking method and tclean implements the w-projection algorithm and can
do faceting.

The phase stability of VLBI arrays is worse than connected short-baseline arrays due to the differing
atmospheric paths between antenna and source. This means that self-calibration (Section 5) is essential in
achieving low noise and high dynamic ranges. Self-calibration requires a source with sufﬁcient S/N to
estimate the gain corrections along the line-of-sight to the target ﬁeld. However, for VLBI observations, its
lack of sensitivity to large scale, diffuse emission means that the total ﬂux available for self-calibration of
a single source can be insufﬁcient, restricting VLBI observations to those ﬁelds with in-beam, or nearby
phase calibrators.

However, for wide-ﬁeld VLBI, the targeting of multiple sources allows self-calibration to proceed, even
when each individual target is faint, by using the combined ﬂux density of the detected sources [162,163].
This technique, called “multi-source self-calibration”, images each source detected after phase referencing
and divides the visibilities are divided by the model to produce a point source at the phase centre. These
data sets are stacked in the (u, v)-plane and self-calibration solutions obtained using the combined S/N of
all target sources. This technique is currently being developed into a fully directional-dependent technique
through the derivation of self-calibration solutions along different line-of-sights across the primary beam
[Harth et al. in prep.].

7. Synthetic data

Forward-modeling methods, where the (u, v)-coverage, thermal noise and simple telescope gain errors
are taken into account to create simulated/fake visibility data based on a model sky brightness distribution,
have been available for a while (e.g., the DTSIM AIPS task, simobserve in CASA, and MeqTrees [164]38).
Recently, very accurate visibility simulations have been developed: The data simulation toolkit within
eht-imaging and the SYnthetic Measurement creator for long Baseline Arrays (SYMBA) [165]39.
Both methods make use of sophisticated data corruption models, are able to include the effects of
interstellar scattering, can use arbitrary source models deﬁned in text ﬁles or images from HDF5 and
FITS data, and use the exact (u, v)-coverage from (observational) UVFITS input. SYMBA and eht-imaging
are routinely used by the EHT to generating synthetic data for dedicated tests to answer speciﬁc scientiﬁc
questions (e.g., about the robustness of speciﬁc features in reconstructed images), optimize calibration
procedures, produce imaging parameter surveys, create test suites for software packages, and identify
how to optimally upgrade VLBI arrays [e.g., 10,119,166–169].

The versatile eht-imaging package bootstraps data corruption effects from a calibrated UVFITS ﬁle of
observational data and produces a UVFITS output. The CASA-based SYMBA software produces both UVFITS
and MS output. Data corruptions effects are simulated from ﬁrst principles with MeqSilhouette to emulate
the correlator output in a real observation [102,103]40. For example, physical parameters for atmospheric
or antenna-pointing models can be adjusted and their effects studied. The suite of possible MeqSilhouette
data corruption effects is continuously being expanded; Faraday rotation effects from the interstellar
medium and atmospheric effects from the ionosphere will soon be added for example. SYMBA passes the
MeqSilhouette output to rPICARD, which results in science-ready calibrated synthetic data akin to that
from a real observation. Work is ongoing to convert SYMBA to simulate low frequency VLBI and enable
feasability studies of new instruments such as SKA-VLBI.

38 http://meqtrees.net.
39 https://bitbucket.org/M_Janssen/symba.
40 https://github.com/rdeane/MeqSilhouette.

Universe 2022, VLBI Science Applications, accepted for publication

26 of 39

Figure 6. Synthetic EHT observations of M87*. Top: Ray-traced general relativistic magnetohydrodynamics
(GRMHD) simulations [170] from the EHT library with different black hole spins, electron temperature
parameters, and magnetic ﬁeld states (“MAD” versus “SANE”). Bottom: SYMBA synthetic observations
corresponding to these models. Reproduced from Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration and et al. [10].

The ability to simulate VLBI data based on known ground-truth models allow non-experts to better
understand the fundamentals of VLBI data. For example, by looking at the amplitude and phase signatures
of simple geometric models or by studying how speciﬁc calibration errors manifest themselves in the
data. Examples of synthetic EHT observations based on state-of-the-art theoretical models are shown in
Figure 6.

Next to the full forward-modeling software packages, there are also dedicated VLBI observing
simulators, such as the Very long baseline interferometry Network SIMulator (VNSIM) [171]41.
These tools assist users and engineers with the design and scheduling of VLBI experiments, as well
as the evaluation of the array performance under various conditions.

8. Summary

In this work we have presented current open-source VLBI methods and their implementations in
various software. Table 2 provides and overview of the major software packages’ capabilities. Several of
these packages can be easily obtained through the KERN repository [172]42 alongside many additional
radio astronomical software libraries.

41 https://github.com/ZhenZHAO/VNSIM.
42 https://kernsuite.info.

50µasSANE,a∗=-0.94,Rhigh=80SANE,a∗=0,Rhigh=10GRMHDmodelsMAD,a∗=0.94,Rhigh=1010203040BrightnessTemperature(109K)SimulatedEHTobservations123456BrightnessTemperature(109K)Universe 2022, VLBI Science Applications, accepted for publication

27 of 39

Table 2. Major VLBI software packages and their capabilities. AIPS and Difmap are still supported by their
originators; requested features and bug ﬁxes can be implemented. All other packages are actively being
developed and supported by larger communities and institutions.

Name

DiFX

Capabilities

Correlation

Links and references

https://ascl.net/1102.024,
https://svn.atnf.csiro.au/difx, [53,54]

SFXC

Correlation

https://svn.astron.nl/sfxc, [55]

AIPS,
ParselTongue

Signal
stabilization, ﬂux
density calibration, imaging,
synthetic data generation

https://ascl.net/9911.003, https://ascl.net/1208.020,
http://www.aips.nrao.edu,
https://www.jive.eu/jivewiki/doku.php?id=
parseltongue:parseltongue, [86,87]

CASA

- VPIPE

- rPICARD

Signal
stabilization, ﬂux
density calibration, imaging

https://ascl.net/1107.013, https://casa.nrao.edu

https://github.com/jradcliffe5/VLBI_pipeline

https://ascl.net/1905.015,
https://bitbucket.org/M_Janssen/picard,
https://hub.docker.com/r/mjanssen2308/casavlbi,
[88,100,101]

(EHT-)HOPS

Signal
denisity calibration

stabilization, ﬂux

https://www.haystack.mit.edu/tech/vlbi/hops.html,
https://github.com/sao-eht/eat, [108,109]

Difmap

Imaging, model ﬁtting

https://ascl.net/1103.001,
ftp://ftp.astro.caltech.edu/pub/difmap/difmap.
html, [140]

eht-imaging

Imaging, model ﬁtting,
synthetic data generation

https://ascl.net/1904.004,
https://github.com/achael/eht-imaging, [142,143]

SMILI

Imaging

WSClean

Imaging

https://ascl.net/1904.005,
https://github.com/astrosmili/smili, [144,145]

https://ascl.net/1408.023,
https://gitlab.com/aroffringa/wsclean, [106]

UV-
MULTIFIT

SYMBA

Geometric model ﬁtting

https://ascl.net/1402.017,
https://launchpad.net/uvmultiﬁt, [146]

Synthetic data generation

https://bitbucket.org/M_Janssen/symba, [165]

Acknowledgments: The authors thank Ciriaco Goddi, Freek Roelofs, and Ilse van Bemmel for their valuable comments
to the manuscript. We also thank the anonymous referees for helpful comments that improved the paper.

Universe 2022, VLBI Science Applications, accepted for publication

28 of 39

Appendix A Telescope baseband data transport to the VLBI correlator

Baseband data from all stations need to be available simultaneously for correlation. One option is
real-time streaming to the VLBI correlator. This is an observing mode in e-MERLIN [173], e-EVN, and
future VLBA after ongoing upgrades.

Real-time correlation is possible if the network paths from the VLBI telescopes (connected at typically
1G/10G/100G) to the correlator (typically 10G/100G) offer sufﬁcient capacity and can maintain real-time
rates reliably with an acceptably low data loss fraction. On paths that cross the Internet this can be
challenging. A drawback is also that re-correlations with different settings are not possible, unless the
baseband data are stored.

In most VLBI experiments the baseband data are captured at the telescopes onto a recorder such as
FlexBuff43, Mark 644, or Octadisk245. The recording media can be physically shipped by courier mail. The
proprietary form factor of the media requires a corresponding playback unit at the correlator.

Alternatively, baseband data ﬁles can be transferred at slower pace over the Internet to the correlator.
Popular high speed data transfer software for this purpose are JIVE jive5ab46 and etc/etd47, Tsunami UDP
transfer48, and Globus GridFTP49. Transfer with slower scp or rsync is also used as a fallback. In an
“e-shipping” mode, the transferred data are stored on a cluster or cloud ﬁle system until later correlation.
In contrast, real-time correlation of the transferred data is commonly referred to as “e-VLBI”.

Appendix B Data ﬂagging

The ﬂagging (removal) of “bad data” is common practice in interferometry. With enough antennas
in the array, one can be rather liberal with the data ﬂagging. VLBI arrays, however, are often sparse.
Care must be taken to distinguish bad data from correctable calibration errors and measurements with
low S / N. Common uncorrectable problems are issues along the telescope data recoding path that may
render data at speciﬁc frequency channels or polarizations unusable, telescopes that are late on source or
experience severe weather, bandpass fall-offs (“frequency edge-channels”), and RFI.50 In the unaveraged
data, baseline-based problems are rare and the ﬂagging should be done on a per-antenna basis. There
are some algorithms that can automatically identify some bad data, e.g., for RFI [105], but to the authors’
knowledge there is no software that is fully sufﬁcient for VLBI data. The VLBI data ﬂagging therefore
remains a subjective task.

Flags are usually applied at different data reduction stages. A priori ﬂags based on telescope operator
logs are made available to PIs. Low S / N fringe non-detections render the underlying data ﬂagged, but
care must be taken here as the fringe-ﬁtting segmentation time does not necessarily match the time ranges
over which data issues are present. Partially affected data over VLBI scan durations should be removed
before fringe-ﬁtting. Finally, manifestations of bad data and calibration errors can easily be identiﬁed in
image reconstructions as spurious features. Figure A1 shows two typical examples of bad data that should
be ﬂagged.

≥

JIVE FlexBuff RAID/JBOD recorders,

4 Gbps, scalable, stationary, https://www.jive.eu/technical-operations-rd-group.

43
44 Conduant/MIT Haystack Mark 6, max. 32 Gbps, shippable, https://www.haystack.mit.edu/mark-6-vlbi-data-system/.
45 Elecs/NAOJ Octadisk2, max. 32 Gbps, shippable, https://www.elecs.co.jp/product/removable_storage.html.
46 https://github.com/jive-vlbi/jive5ab.
47 https://github.com/jive-vlbi/etransfer.
48 https://tsunami-udp.sourceforge.net.
49 https://www.globus.org/.
50 RFI affects autocorrelation-based calibration steps and strong RFI can also affect the crosscorrelations.

Universe 2022, VLBI Science Applications, accepted for publication

29 of 39

Figure A1. Examples of ﬂagged bad data indicated with crosses. These plots are produced automatically
with jiveplot by rPICARD and show visibility amplitudes and phases per baseline and per scan, color-coded
by polarization. Top: Scan-averaged EVN data on the Effelsberg-Westerbork baseline. The Effelsberg
RCP channel and ﬁrst four spectral windows contain no signal and have been ﬂagged. Bottom:
Frequency-averaged VLBA data on the Brewster-Hancock baseline. Brewster has been a few seconds
late on source, resulting in bad phases and amplitudes at the start of the scan.

Universe 2022, VLBI Science Applications, accepted for publication

30 of 39

References

5.

9.

7.

6.

8.

2.

1.

4.

3.

1 Broadband-RF VLBI System. PASP 2013, 125, 196.

The ALMA Phasing System: A Beamforming
PASP 2018, 130, 015002,

Gaylard, M.J.; Bietenholz, M.F.; Combrinck, L.; Booth, R.S.; Buchner, S.J.; Fanaroff, B.L.; MacLeod, G.C.;
Nicolson, G.D.; Quick, J.F.H.; Stronkhorst, P.; Venkatasubramani, T.L. An African VLBI Network of radio
telescopes. Proceedings of SAIP2011, 2011, pp. 473–478, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1405.7214].
Deane, R. Extragalactic VLBI surveys in the MeerKAT era. MeerKAT Science: On the Pathway to the SKA,
2016, p. 17, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1709.03512].
Matthews, L.D.; Crew, G.B.; Doeleman, S.S.; et al.
Capability for Ultra-high-resolution Science at (Sub)Millimeter Wavelengths.
[arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1711.06770].
Venturi, T.; Paragi, Z.; Lindqvist, M.; et al. VLBI20-30: a scientiﬁc roadmap for the next decade – The future of
the European VLBI Network. arXiv e-prints 2020, p. arXiv:2007.02347, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/2007.02347].
Barbosa, D.; Coelho, B.; Antón, S.; Bergano, M.; Boekholt, T.; Correia, A.C.M.; Maia, D.; Pandeirada,
J.; Ribeiro, V.; Adams, J.; Barraca, J.P.; Gomes, D.; Morgado, B. Radio astronomy and Space science in
Azores: Enhancing the Atlantic VLBI infrastructure cluster. Advances in Space Research 2021, 68, 3064–3078,
[arXiv:astro-ph.IM/2107.03437].
Whitney, A.R.; Beaudoin, C.J.; Cappallo, R.J.; Corey, B.E.; Crew, G.B.; Doeleman, S.S.; Lapsley, D.E.; Hinton,
A.A.; McWhirter, S.R.; Niell, A.E.; Rogers, A.E.E.; Ruszczyk, C.A.; Smythe, D.L.; SooHoo, J.; Titus, M.A.
Demonstration of a 16 Gbps Station−
Vertatschitsch, L.; Primiani, R.; Young, A.; Weintroub, J.; Crew, G.B.; McWhirter, S.R.; Beaudoin, C.; Doeleman,
S.; Blackburn, L. R2DBE: A Wideband Digital Backend for the Event Horizon Telescope. PASP 2015, 127, 1226.
Han, S.T.; Lee, J.W.; Kang, J.; Je, D.H.; Chung, M.H.; Wi, S.O.; Sasao, T.; Wylde, R. Millimeter-wave Receiver
Optics for Korean VLBI Network. International Journal of Infrared and Millimeter Waves 2008, 29, 69–78.
Boccardi, B.; Krichbaum, T.P.; Ros, E.; Zensus, J.A. Radio observations of active galactic nuclei with mm-VLBI.
A&A Rev. 2017, 25, 4, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1711.07548].
Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration.; et al.. First M87 Event Horizon Telescope Results. I. The Shadow of
the Supermassive Black Hole. ApJ 2019, 875, L1, [arXiv:astro-ph.GA/1906.11238].
Selina, R.J.; Murphy, E.J.; McKinnon, M.; Beasley, A.; Butler, B.; Carilli, C.; Clark, B.; Durand, S.; Erickson,
A.; Grammer, W.; Hiriart, R.; Jackson, J.; Kent, B.; Mason, B.; Morgan, M.; Ojeda, O.Y.; Rosero, V.; Shillue, W.;
Sturgis, S.; Urbain, D. The ngVLA Reference Design. Science with a Next Generation Very Large Array; Murphy,
E., Ed., 2018, Vol. 517, Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc Conference Series, p. 15, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1810.08197].
12. Murphy, E.J.; Bolatto, A.; Chatterjee, S.; Casey, C.M.; Chomiuk, L.; Dale, D.; de Pater, I.; Dickinson, M.;
Francesco, J.D.; Hallinan, G.; Isella, A.; Kohno, K.; Kulkarni, S.R.; Lang, C.; Lazio, T.J.W.; Leroy, A.K.;
Loinard, L.; Maccarone, T.J.; Matthews, B.C.; Osten, R.A.; Reid, M.J.; Riechers, D.; Sakai, N.; Walter, F.;
Wilner, D. The ngVLA Science Case and Associated Science Requirements. Science with a Next Generation
Very Large Array; Murphy, E., Ed., 2018, Vol. 517, Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc Conference Series, p. 3,
[arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1810.07524].
Dewdney, P.E.; Hall, P.J.; Schilizzi, R.T.; Lazio, T.J.L.W. The Square Kilometre Array. IEEE Proceedings 2009,
97, 1482–1496.
Paragi, Z.; Godfrey, L.; Reynolds, C.; et al. Very Long Baseline Interferometry with the SKA. Advancing
Astrophysics with the Square Kilometre Array (AASKA14), 2015, p. 143, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1412.5971].
Doeleman, S.; Blackburn, L.; Dexter, J.; et al. Studying Black Holes on Horizon Scales with VLBI Ground
Arrays. Bulletin of the American Astronomical Society, 2019, Vol. 51, p. 256, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1909.01411].
Kardashev, N.S.; Novikov, I.D.; Lukash, V.N.; Pilipenko, S.V.; Mikheeva, E.V.; Bisikalo, D.V.; Wiebe, D.S.;
Doroshkevich, A.G.; Zasov, A.V.; Zinchenko, I.I.; Ivanov, P.B.; Kostenko, V.I.; Larchenkova, T.I.; Likhachev, S.F.;
Malov, I.F.; Malofeev, V.M.; Pozanenko, A.S.; Smirnov, A.V.; Sobolev, A.M.; Cherepashchuk, A.M.; Shchekinov,
Y.A. Review of scientiﬁc topics for the Millimetron space observatory. Physics Uspekhi 2014, 57, 1199–1228,
[arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1502.06071].

13.

11.

14.

15.

16.

10.

Universe 2022, VLBI Science Applications, accepted for publication

31 of 39

22.

19.

17.

18.

20.

21.

23.

Johnson, M.; Haworth, K.; Pesce, D.W.; Palumbo, D.C.M.; Blackburn, L.; Akiyama, K.; Boroson, D.; Bouman,
K.L.; Farah, J.R.; Fish, V.L.; Honma, M.; Kawashima, T.; Kino, M.; Raymond, A.; Silver, M.; Weintroub, J.;
Wielgus, M.; Doeleman, S.S.; Kauffmann, J.; Keating, G.K.; Krichbaum, T.P.; Loinard, L.; Narayanan, G.; Doi,
A.; James, D.J.; Marrone, D.P.; Mizuno, Y.; Nagai, H. Studying black holes on horizon scales with space-VLBI.
Bulletin of the American Astronomical Society, 2019, Vol. 51, p. 235, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1909.01405].
Fish, V.L.; Shea, M.; Akiyama, K. Imaging black holes and jets with a VLBI array including multiple space-based
telescopes. Advances in Space Research 2020, 65, 821–830, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1903.09539].
Gurvits, L.I.; Paragi, Z.; Casasola, V.; Conway, J.; Davelaar, J.; Falcke, H.; Fender, R.; Frey, S.; Fromm, C.M.;
Miró, C.G.; Garrett, M.A.; Giroletti, M.; Goddi, C.; Gómez, J.L.; van der Gucht, J.; Guirado, J.C.; Haiman, Z.;
Helmich, F.; Humphreys, E.; Impellizzeri, V.; Kramer, M.; Lindqvist, M.; Linz, H.; Liuzzo, E.; Lobanov, A.P.;
Mizuno, Y.; Rezzolla, L.; Roelofs, F.; Ros, E.; Rygl, K.L.J.; Savolainen, T.; Schuster, K.; Venturi, T.; Wiedner, M.C.;
Zensus, J.A. THEZA: TeraHertz Exploration and Zooming-in for Astrophysics. Experimental Astronomy 2021,
51, 559–594, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1908.10767].
Marcote, B.; Paragi, Z.; Hessels, J.W.T.; Keimpema, A.; van Langevelde, H.J.; Huang, Y.; Bassa, C.G.; Bogdanov,
S.; Bower, G.C.; Burke-Spolaor, S.; Butler, B.J.; Campbell, R.M.; Chatterjee, S.; Cordes, J.M.; Demorest, P.;
Garrett, M.A.; Ghosh, T.; Kaspi, V.M.; Law, C.J.; Lazio, T.J.W.; McLaughlin, M.A.; Ransom, S.M.; Salter, C.J.;
Scholz, P.; Seymour, A.; Siemion, A.; Spitler, L.G.; Tendulkar, S.P.; Wharton, R.S. The Repeating Fast Radio
Burst FRB 121102 as Seen on Milliarcsecond Angular Scales. ApJ 2017, 834, L8, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1701.01099].
Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration.; et al. First Sagittarius A* Event Horizon Telescope Results. I. The
Shadow of the Supermassive Black Hole in the Center of the Milky Way. ApJ 2022, 930, L12.
Gabuzda, D. Evidence for Helical Magnetic Fields Associated with AGN Jets and the Action of a Cosmic
Battery. Galaxies 2018, 7, 5.
Gabuzda, D.C. Polarization VLBI observations of AGN jets now and into the future. Advances in Space Research
2020, 65, 731–738.
Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration.; et al. First M87 Event Horizon Telescope Results. VII. Polarization of
the Ring. ApJ 2021, 910, L12, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/2105.01169].
Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration.; et al. First M87 Event Horizon Telescope Results. VIII. Magnetic Field
Structure near The Event Horizon. ApJ 2021, 910, L13, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/2105.01173].
Gabuzda, D.C. Inherent and Local Magnetic Field Structures in Jets from Active Galactic Nuclei. Galaxies 2021,
9, 58.
Habing, H.J. Circumstellar envelopes and Asymptotic Giant Branch stars. A&A Rev. 1996, 7, 97–207.
27.
28. Momjian, E.; Romney, J.D.; Carilli, C.L.; Troland, T.H. Sensitive VLBI Continuum and H I Absorption
Observations of NGC 7674: First Scientiﬁc Observations with the Combined Array VLBA, VLA, and Arecibo.
ApJ 2003, 597, 809–822, [arXiv:astro-ph/astro-ph/0307399].
Goddi, C.; Moscadelli, L.; Alef, W.; Tarchi, A.; Brand, J.; Pani, M. Kinematics of H2O masers in high-mass star
forming regions. A&A 2005, 432, 161–173, [arXiv:astro-ph/astro-ph/0411164].
Hachisuka, K.; Brunthaler, A.; Menten, K.M.; Reid, M.J.; Imai, H.; Hagiwara, Y.; Miyoshi, M.; Horiuchi, S.;
Sasao, T. Water Maser Motions in W3(OH) and a Determination of Its Distance. ApJ 2006, 645, 337–344,
[arXiv:astro-ph/astro-ph/0512226].
Reid, M.J.; Braatz, J.A.; Condon, J.J.; Greenhill, L.J.; Henkel, C.; Lo, K.Y. The Megamaser Cosmology
ApJ 2009, 695, 287–291,
Project.
[arXiv:astro-ph/0811.4345].
Brunthaler, A.; Reid, M.J.; Menten, K.M.; Zheng, X.W.; Bartkiewicz, A.; Choi, Y.K.; Dame, T.; Hachisuka, K.;
Immer, K.; Moellenbrock, G.; Moscadelli, L.; Rygl, K.L.J.; Sanna, A.; Sato, M.; Wu, Y.; Xu, Y.; Zhang, B. The Bar
and Spiral Structure Legacy (BeSSeL) survey: Mapping the Milky Way with VLBI astrometry. Astronomische
Nachrichten 2011, 332, 461, [arXiv:astro-ph.GA/1102.5350].
Goddi, C.; Moscadelli, L.; Sanna, A. Infall and outﬂow within 400 AU from a high-mass protostar. 3D velocity
ﬁelds from methanol and water masers in AFLG 5142. A&A 2011, 535, L8, [arXiv:astro-ph.GA/1110.1647].

I. Very Long Baseline Interferometric Observations of UGC 3789.

25.

30.

31.

26.

32.

24.

29.

33.

Universe 2022, VLBI Science Applications, accepted for publication

32 of 39

34.

35.

Reid, M.J.; Braatz, J.A.; Condon, J.J.; Lo, K.Y.; Kuo, C.Y.; Impellizzeri, C.M.V.; Henkel, C. The Megamaser
Cosmology Project. IV. A Direct Measurement of the Hubble Constant from UGC 3789. ApJ 2013, 767, 154,
[arXiv:astro-ph.CO/1207.7292].
Goddi, C.; Surcis, G.; Moscadelli, L.; Imai, H.; Vlemmings, W.H.T.; van Langevelde, H.J.; Sanna, A. Measuring
magnetic ﬁelds from water masers in the synchrotron protostellar jet in W3(H2O). A&A 2017, 597, A43,
[arXiv:astro-ph.GA/1608.02951].

41.

39.

40.

37.

38.

42.

36. Moscadelli, L.; Sanna, A.; Goddi, C.; Krishnan, V.; Massi, F.; Bacciotti, F. Protostellar Outﬂows at the EarliesT
Stages (POETS). III. H2O masers tracing disk-winds and jets near luminous YSOs. A&A 2019, 631, A74,
[arXiv:astro-ph.SR/1909.08374].
Garrett, M.A.; Muxlow, T.W.B.; Garrington, S.T.; Alef, W.; Alberdi, A.; van Langevelde, H.J.; Venturi, T.;
Polatidis, A.G.; Kellermann, K.I.; Baan, W.A.; Kus, A.; Wilkinson, P.N.; Richards, A.M.S. AGN and starbursts
at high redshift: High resolution EVN radio observations of the Hubble Deep Field. A&A 2001, 366, L5–L8,
[arXiv:astro-ph/astro-ph/0102037].
Herrera Ruiz, N.; Middelberg, E.; Deller, A.; Norris, R.P.; Best, P.N.; Brisken, W.; Schinnerer, E.; Smolˇci´c, V.;
Delvecchio, I.; Momjian, E.; Bomans, D.; Scoville, N.Z.; Carilli, C. The faint radio sky: VLBA observations of
the COSMOS ﬁeld. A&A 2017, 607, A132, [arXiv:astro-ph.GA/1707.07512].
Radcliffe, J.F.; Garrett, M.A.; Muxlow, T.W.B.; Beswick, R.J.; Barthel, P.D.; Deller, A.T.; Keimpema, A.; Campbell,
R.M.; Wrigley, N. Nowhere to Hide: Radio-faint AGN in GOODS-N ﬁeld. I. Initial catalogue and radio
properties. A&A 2018, 619, A48, [arXiv:astro-ph.GA/1808.04296].
Spingola, C.; Mckean, J.P.; Deller, A.; Moldon, J. Gravitational lensing at milliarcsecond angular resolution
with VLBI observations. 14th European VLBI Network Symposium & Users Meeting (EVN 2018), 2018, p. 33,
[arXiv:astro-ph.GA/1902.07046].
Spingola, C.; McKean, J.P.; Lee, M.; Deller, A.; Moldon, J. A novel search for gravitationally lensed
radio sources in wide-ﬁeld VLBI imaging from the mJIVE-20 survey. MNRAS 2019, 483, 2125–2153,
[arXiv:astro-ph.GA/1811.09152].
Deller, A.T.; Goss, W.M.; Brisken, W.F.; Chatterjee, S.; Cordes, J.M.; Janssen, G.H.; Kovalev, Y.Y.; Lazio, T.J.W.;
Petrov, L.; Stappers, B.W.; Lyne, A. Microarcsecond VLBI Pulsar Astrometry with PSRπ II. Parallax Distances
for 57 Pulsars. ApJ 2019, 875, 100, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1808.09046].
Duev, D.A.; Molera Calvés, G.; Pogrebenko, S.V.; Gurvits, L.I.; Cimó, G.; Bocanegra Bahamon,
A&A 2012, 541, A43,
T.
[arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1203.4408].
Thompson, A.R.; Moran, J.M.; Swenson, Jr., G.W. Interferometry and Synthesis in Radio Astronomy, 3rd Edition;
Springer International Publishing, 2017.
Morabito, L.K.; Jackson, N.J.; Mooney, S.; et al. Sub-arcsecond imaging with the International LOFAR Telescope.
I. Foundational calibration strategy and pipeline. A&A 2022, 658, A1, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/2108.07283].
Allan, D.W. Statistics of atomic frequency standards. IEEE Proceedings 1966, 54, 221–230.
Primiani, R.A.; Young, K.H.; Young, A.; Patel, N.; Wilson, R.W.; Vertatschitsch, L.; Chitwood, B.B.; Srinivasan,
R.; MacMahon, D.; Weintroub, J. SWARM: A 32 GHz Correlator and VLBI Beamformer for the Submillimeter
Array. Journal of Astronomical Instrumentation 2016, 5, 1641006–810, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1611.02596].
Kim, H.G.; Han, S.T.; Sohn, B.W.; Oh, S.J.; Je, D.H.; Wi, S.O.; Song, M.G. Construction of the Korean VLBI
Network (KVN). European VLBI Network on New Developments in VLBI Science and Technology, 2004, pp.
281–284, [arXiv:astro-ph/astro-ph/0412689].
Lee, S.S.; Byun, D.Y.; Oh, C.S.; Han, S.T.; Je, D.H.; Kim, K.T.; Wi, S.O.; Cho, S.H.; Sohn, B.W.; Kim, J.; Lee, J.; Oh,
S.J.; Song, M.G.; Kang, J.; Chung, M.H.; Lee, J.A.; Oh, J.; Bae, J.H.; Yun, S.Y.; Lee, J.W.; Kim, B.G.; Chung, H.;
Roh, D.G.; Lee, C.H.; Kim, H.G.; Ryoung Kim, H.; Yeom, J.H.; Kurayama, T.; Jung, T.; Park, P.; Kim, M.J.; Yoon,
D.H.; Kim, W.J. Single-Dish Performance of KVN 21 m Radio Telescopes: Simultaneous Observations at 22 and
43 GHz. PASP 2011, 123, 1398, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1110.3881].
Lee, S.S.; Petrov, L.; Byun, D.Y.; Kim, J.; Jung, T.; Song, M.G.; Oh, C.S.; Roh, D.G.; Je, D.H.; Wi, S.O.; Sohn, B.W.;
Oh, S.J.; Kim, K.T.; Yeom, J.H.; Chung, M.H.; Kang, J.; Han, S.T.; Lee, J.W.; Kim, B.G.; Chung, H.; Kim, H.G.;

Spacecraft VLBI and Doppler tracking: algorithms and implementation.

46.
47.

48.

49.

44.

45.

43.

50.

Universe 2022, VLBI Science Applications, accepted for publication

33 of 39

Ryoung Kim, H.; Kang, Y.W.; Cho, S.H. Early Science with the Korean VLBI Network: Evaluation of System
Performance. AJ 2014, 147, 77.
Kobayashi, H.; Sasao, T.; Kawaguchi, N.; Manabe, S.; Omodaka, T.; Kameya, O.; Shibata, K.M.; Miyaji, T.;
Honma, M.; Tamura, Y.; Hirota, T.; Kuji, S.; Horiai, K.; Sakai, S.; Sato, K.; Iwadate, K.; Kanya, Y.; Ujihara, H.; Jike,
T.; Fujii, T.; Motiduki, N.; Oyama, T.; Kurayama, H.; Kamohara, R.; Suda, H.; Kasuga, T. VERA: A New VLBI
Instrument Free from the Atmosphere. New technologies in VLBI; Minh, Y.C., Ed., 2003, Vol. 306, Astronomical
Society of the Paciﬁc Conference Series, p. 367.
Lee, S.S.; Oh, C.S.; Roh, D.G.; Oh, S.J.; Kim, J.; Yeom, J.H.; Kim, H.R.; Jung, D.G.; Byun, D.Y.; Jung, T.; Kawaguchi,
N.; Shibata, K.M.; Wajima, K. A New Hardware Correlator in Korea: Performance Evaluation Using KVN
Observations. Journal of Korean Astronomical Society 2015, 48, 125–137, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1503.07972].
Deller, A.T.; Tingay, S.J.; Bailes, M.; West, C. DiFX: A Software Correlator for Very Long Baseline Interferometry
Using Multiprocessor Computing Environments. PASP 2007, 119, 318–336, [arXiv:astro-ph/astro-ph/0702141].
Deller, A.T.; Brisken, W.F.; Phillips, C.J.; Morgan, J.; Alef, W.; Cappallo, R.; Middelberg, E.; Romney, J.;
Rottmann, H.; Tingay, S.J.; Wayth, R. DiFX-2: A More Flexible, Efﬁcient, Robust, and Powerful Software
Correlator. PASP 2011, 123, 275, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1101.0885].
Keimpema, A.; Kettenis, M.M.; Pogrebenko, S.V.; Campbell, R.M.; Cimó, G.; Duev, D.A.; Eldering, B.; Kruithof,
N.; van Langevelde, H.J.; Marchal, D.; Molera Calvés, G.; Ozdemir, H.; Paragi, Z.; Pidopryhora, Y.; Szomoru, A.;
Yang, J. The SFXC software correlator for very long baseline interferometry: algorithms and implementation.
Experimental Astronomy 2015, 39, 259–279, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1502.00467].
Napier, P.J.; Bagri, D.S.; Clark, B.G.; Rogers, A.E.E.; Romney, J.D.; Thompson, A.R.; Walker, R.C. The Very Long
Baseline Array. IEEE Proceedings 1994, 82, 658–672.
Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration.; et al. First M87 Event Horizon Telescope Results. II. Array and
Instrumentation. ApJ 2019, 875, L2, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1906.11239].
Porcas, R. A history of the EVN. 10th European VLBI Network Symposium and EVN Users Meeting: VLBI
and the New Generation of Radio Arrays, 2010, Vol. 10, p. 11.
Surkis, I.; Ken, V.; Kurdubova, Y.; Mishina, N.; Mishin, V.; Shantyr, V.; Zhuravov, D.; Zimovsky, V. The RASFX
VGOS GPU Based Software Correlator. Transactions of the Institute of Applied Astronomy RAS 2017, pp. 123–126.
Shuygina, N.; Ivanov, D.; Ipatov, A.; Gayazov, I.; Marshalov, D.; Melnikov, A.; Kurdubov, S.; Vasilyev, M.; Ilin,
G.; Skurikhina, E.; Surkis, I.; Mardyshkin, V.; Mikhailov, A.; Salnikov, A.; Vytnov, A.; Rakhimov, I.; Dyakov,
A.; Oliﬁrov, V. Russian VLBI network “Quasar”: Current status and outlook. Geodesy and Geodynamics 2019,
10, 150–156. From Space Geodesy to Astro-Geodynamics.
Zhang, F.; Zhao, C.; Han, S.; Ma, F.; Xiang, D. GPU-Based Parallel Implementation of VLBI Correlator for Deep
Space Exploration System. Remote Sensing 2021, 13, 1226.
Rioja, M.; Dodson, R.; Asaki, Y.; Hartnett, J.; Tingay, S. The Impact of Frequency Standards on Coherence in
VLBI at the Highest Frequencies. AJ 2012, 144, 121, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1209.3989].
Clivati, C.; Aiello, R.; Bianco, G.; Bortolotti, C.; De Natale, P.; Di Sarno, V.; Maddaloni, P.; Maccaferri, G.; Mura,
A.; Negusini, M.; Levi, F.; Perini, F.; Ricci, R.; Roma, M.; Amato, L.S.; de Cumis, M.S.; Stagni, M.; Tuozzi, A.;
Calonico, D. Common-clock very long baseline interferometry using a coherent optical ﬁber link. Optica 2020,
7, 1031–1037.
Krehlik, P.; Buczek, Ł.; Kołodziej, J.; Lipi ´nski, M.; ´Sliwczy ´nski, Ł.; Nawrocki, J.; Noga´s, P.; Marecki, A.;
Pazderski, E.; Ablewski, P.; Bober, M.; Ciuryło, R.; Cygan, A.; Lisak, D.; Masłowski, P.; Morzy ´nski, P.; Zawada,
M.; Campbell, R.M.; Pieczerak, J.; Binczewski, A.; Turza, K. Fibre-optic delivery of time and frequency to VLBI
station. A&A 2017, 603, A48, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1703.09479].
Likhachev, S.F.; Kostenko, V.I.; Girin, I.A.; Andrianov, A.S.; Rudnitskiy, A.G.; Zharov, V.E. Software
Journal of Astronomical Instrumentation 2017, 6, 1750004–131,
Correlator for Radioastron Mission.
[arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1706.06320].
Gordon, D. CALC: The Next Upgrade. IVS 2004 General Meeting Proceedings 2004, pp. 265–266.
Sekido, M.; Fukushima, T. A VLBI Delay Model for Radio Sources at a Finite Distance. Journal of Geodesy 2006,
80, 137–149.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.
67.

Universe 2022, VLBI Science Applications, accepted for publication

34 of 39

68. Wootten, A.; Thompson, A.R. The Atacama Large Millimeter/Submillimeter Array. IEEE Proceedings 2009,

69.

70.

71.
72.
73.

74.

75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

86.

87.

97, 1463–1471, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/0904.3739].
Martí-Vidal, I.; Roy, A.; Conway, J.; Zensus, A.J. Calibration of mixed-polarization interferometric observations.
Tools for the reduction of interferometric data from elements with linear and circular polarization receivers.
A&A 2016, 587, A143, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1601.04266].
Goddi, C.; Martí-Vidal, I.; Messias, H.; Crew, G.B.; Herrero-Illana, R.; Impellizzeri, V.; Rottmann, H.; Wagner, J.;
Fomalont, E.; Matthews, L.D.; Petry, D.; Phillips, N.; Tilanus, R.; Villard, E.; Blackburn, L.; Janssen, M.; Wielgus,
M. Calibration of ALMA as a Phased Array. ALMA Observations During the 2017 VLBI Campaign. PASP
2019, 131, 075003, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1901.09987].
Alef, W.; Porcas, R.W. VLBI fringe-ﬁtting with antenna-based residuals. A&A 1986, 168, 365–368.
Schwab, F.R.; Cotton, W.D. Global fringe search techniques for VLBI. AJ 1983, 88, 688–694.
Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration.; et al. First M87 Event Horizon Telescope Results. III. Data Processing
and Calibration. ApJ 2019, 875, L3, [arXiv:astro-ph.GA/1906.11240].
Natarajan, I.; Deane, R.; van Bemmel, I.; van Langevelde, H.J.; Small, D.; Kettenis, M.; Paragi, Z.; Smirnov,
O.; Szomoru, A. A probabilistic approach to phase calibration - I. Effects of source structure on fringe-ﬁtting.
MNRAS 2020, 496, 801–813, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/2005.12655].
Doi, A.; Fujisawa, K.; Habe, A.; Honma, M.; Kawaguchi, N.; Kobayashi, H.; Murata, Y.; Omodaka, T.; Sudou,
H.; Takaba, H. Bigradient Phase Referencing. PASJ 2006, 58, 777–785, [arXiv:astro-ph/astro-ph/0604596].
Fomalont, E.B.; Kopeikin, S. Phase Referencing Using Several Calibrator Sources. Proceedings of the 6th EVN
Symposium, 2002, p. 53.
Rioja, M.J.; Dodson, R.; Orosz, G.; Imai, H.; Frey, S. MultiView High Precision VLBI Astrometry at Low
Frequencies. AJ 2017, 153, 105, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1612.02554].
Hyland, L.J.; Reid, M.J.; Ellingsen, S.P.; Rioja, M.J.; Dodson, R.; Orosz, G.; Masson, C.R.; McCallum, J.M. Inverse
Multiview. I. Multicalibrator Inverse Phase Referencing for Microarcsecond Very Long Baseline Interferometry
Astrometry. ApJ 2022, 932, 52, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/2205.00092].
Reid, M.; Honma, M. Microarcsecond Radio Astrometry. Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics 2014,
52, 339–372, [https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-astro-081913-040006].
Rogers, A.E.E.; Doeleman, S.S.; Moran, J.M. Fringe Detection Methods for Very Long Baseline Arrays. AJ 1995,
109, 1391.
Rioja, M.J.; Dodson, R.; Kamohara, R.; Colomer, F.; Bujarrabal, V.; Kobayashi, H. Relative Astrometry of
the J = 1–>0, v = 1 and v = 2 SiO Masers toward R Leonis Minoris Using VERA. PASJ 2008, 60, 1031,
[arXiv:astro-ph/0811.3820].
Rioja, M.; Dodson, R. High-precision Astrometric Millimeter Very Long Baseline Interferometry Using a New
Method for Atmospheric Calibration. AJ 2011, 141, 114, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1101.2051].
Rioja, M.J.; Dodson, R.; Jung, T.; Sohn, B.W.; Byun, D.Y.; Agudo, I.; Cho, S.H.; Lee, S.S.; Kim, J.; Kim, K.T.; Oh,
C.S.; Han, S.T.; Je, D.H.; Chung, M.H.; Wi, S.O.; Kang, J.; Lee, J.W.; Chung, H.; Ryoung Kim, H.; Kim, H.G.; Lee,
C.H.; Roh, D.G.; Oh, S.J.; Yeom, J.H.; Song, M.G.; Kang, Y.W. Veriﬁcation of the Astrometric Performance of
the Korean VLBI Network, Using Comparative SFPR Studies with the VLBA at 14/7 mm. AJ 2014, 148, 84,
[arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1407.4604].
Rioja, M.J.; Dodson, R.; Jung, T.; Sohn, B.W. The Power of Simultaneous Multifrequency Observations for
mm-VLBI: Astrometry up to 130 GHz with the KVN. AJ 2015, 150, 202, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1509.02621].
Rioja, M.J.; Dodson, R. Precise radio astrometry and new developments for the next-generation of instruments.
A&A Rev. 2020, 28, 6, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/2010.02156].
Greisen, E.W. AIPS, the VLA, and the VLBA. Information Handling in Astronomy - Historical Vistas; Heck, A.,
Ed., 2003, Vol. 285, Astrophysics and Space Science Library, p. 109.
Kettenis, M.; van Langevelde, H.J.; Reynolds, C.; Cotton, B. ParselTongue: AIPS Talking Python. Astronomical
Data Analysis Software and Systems XV; Gabriel, C.; Arviset, C.; Ponz, D.; Enrique, S., Eds., 2006, Vol. 351,
Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc Conference Series, p. 497.

Universe 2022, VLBI Science Applications, accepted for publication

35 of 39

91.

93.

92.

94.

95.

89.
90.

Revisiting the radio interferometer measurement equation.

88. McMullin, J.P.; Waters, B.; Schiebel, D.; Young, W.; Golap, K. CASA Architecture and Applications.
Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems XVI; Shaw, R.A.; Hill, F.; Bell, D.J., Eds., 2007, Vol. 376,
Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc Conference Series, p. 127.
Thompson, A.R.; Clark, B.G.; Wade, C.M.; Napier, P.J. The Very Large Array. ApJS 1980, 44, 151–167.
van Haarlem, M.P.; Wise, M.W.; Gunst, A.W.; et al. LOFAR: The LOw-Frequency ARray. A&A 2013, 556, A2,
[arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1305.3550].
Goddi, C.; Falcke, H.; Kramer, M.; et al.. BlackHoleCam: Fundamental physics of the galactic center.
International Journal of Modern Physics D 2017, 26, 1730001–239, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1606.08879].
Van Bemmel, I.M.; Kettenis, M.; Small, D.; Janssen, M.; Moellenbrock, G.A.; Petry, D.; Goddi, C.; Linford, J.D.;
Rygl, K.L.J.; Liuzzo, E.; Marcote, B.; Bayandina, O.S.; Schweighart, N.; Verkouter, M.; Keimpema, A.; Szomoru,
A.; van Langevelde, H.J. Accepted for publication by PASP 2022.
Hamaker, J.P.; Bregman, J.D.; Sault, R.J. Understanding radio polarimetry. I. Mathematical foundations. A&AS
1996, 117, 137–147.
Smirnov, O.M. Revisiting the radio interferometer measurement equation. I. A full-sky Jones formalism. A&A
2011, 527, A106, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1101.1764].
Smirnov, O.M.
direction-dependent effects. A&A 2011, 527, A107, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1101.1765].
Smirnov, O.M. Revisiting the radio interferometer measurement equation. III. Addressing direction-dependent
effects in 21 cm WSRT observations of 3C 147. A&A 2011, 527, A108, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1101.1768].
Smirnov, O.M. Revisiting the radio interferometer measurement equation. IV. A generalized tensor formalism.
A&A 2011, 531, A159, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1106.0579].
Rocklin, M. Dask: Parallel Computation with Blocked algorithms and Task Scheduling. PROC. OF THE 14th
PYTHON IN SCIENCE CONF. 2015, pp. 126–132.
Hoyer, S.; Hamman, J. xarray: N-D labeled Arrays and Datasets in Python. Journal of Open Research Software
2017, 5, 10.
Janssen, M.; Goddi, C.; Falcke, H.; van Rossum, D.; van Bemmel, I.; Kettenis, M.; Small, D.; Marti-Vidal, I.
RPICARD: A CASA-based Calibration Pipeline for VLBI Data. 14th European VLBI Network Symposium &
Users Meeting (EVN 2018), 2018, p. 80.
Janssen, M.; Goddi, C.; van Bemmel, I.M.; Kettenis, M.; Small, D.; Liuzzo, E.; Rygl, K.; Martí-Vidal,
I.; Blackburn, L.; Wielgus, M.; Falcke, H. rPICARD: A CASA-based calibration pipeline for VLBI data.
Calibration and imaging of 7 mm VLBA observations of the AGN jet in M 87. A&A 2019, 626, A75,
[arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1902.01749].
Blecher, T.; Deane, R.; Bernardi, G.; Smirnov, O. MEQSILHOUETTE: a mm-VLBI observation and signal
corruption simulator. MNRAS 2017, 464, 143–151, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1608.04521].

II. Calibration and

101.

102.

100.

99.

97.

96.

98.

103. Natarajan, I.; Deane, R.; Martí-Vidal, I.; Roelofs, F.; Janssen, M.; Wielgus, M.; Blackburn, L.; Blecher, T.; Perkins,
S.; Smirnov, O.; Davelaar, J.; Moscibrodzka, M.; Chael, A.; Bouman, K.L.; Kim, J.Y.; Bernardi, G.; van Bemmel,
I.; Falcke, H.; Özel, F.; Psaltis, D. MeqSilhouette v2: spectrally resolved polarimetric synthetic data generation
for the event horizon telescope. MNRAS 2022, 512, 490–504, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/2202.11478].
Pardo, J.R.; Cernicharo, J.; Serabyn, E. Atmospheric transmission at microwaves (ATM): an improved model
for millimeter/submillimeter applications. IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation 2001, 49, 1683–1694.
105. Offringa, A.R.; van de Gronde, J.J.; Roerdink, J.B.T.M. A morphological algorithm for improving

104.

radio-frequency interference detection. A&A 2012, 539, A95, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1201.3364].

106. Offringa, A.R.; McKinley, B.; Hurley-Walker, N.; et al. WSCLEAN: an implementation of a fast, generic

wide-ﬁeld imager for radio astronomy. MNRAS 2014, 444, 606–619, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1407.1943].

107. Keimpema, A.; Kettenis, M.; Small, D.; Dijkema, T.J.; Szomoru, A. Efﬁcient Remote Interactive Pipelines Using
CASA and Jupyter. Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems XXIX; Pizzo, R.; Deul, E.R.; Mol, J.D.;
de Plaa, J.; Verkouter, H., Eds., 2020, Vol. 527, Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc Conference Series, p. 579.
108. Whitney, A.R.; Cappallo, R.; Aldrich, W.; Anderson, B.; Bos, A.; Casse, J.; Goodman, J.; Parsley, S.; Pogrebenko,
S.; Schilizzi, R.; Smythe, D. Mark 4 VLBI correlator: Architecture and algorithms. Radio Science 2004, 39, RS1007.

Universe 2022, VLBI Science Applications, accepted for publication

36 of 39

109.

110.

Blackburn, L.; Chan, C.k.; Crew, G.B.; Fish, V.L.; Issaoun, S.; Johnson, M.D.; Wielgus, M.; Akiyama, K.; Barrett,
J.; Bouman, K.L.; Cappallo, R.; Chael, A.A.; Janssen, M.; Lonsdale, C.J.; Doeleman, S.S. EHT-HOPS Pipeline for
Millimeter VLBI Data Reduction. ApJ 2019, 882, 23, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1903.08832].
Issaoun, S.; Johnson, M.D.; Blackburn, L.; et al. The Size, Shape, and Scattering of Sagittarius A* at 86 GHz:
First VLBI with ALMA. ApJ 2019, 871, 30, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1901.06226].

111. Kim, J.Y.; Krichbaum, T.P.; Broderick, A.E.; et al. Event Horizon Telescope imaging of the archetypal blazar 3C

112.

113.

114.

279 at an extreme 20 microarcsecond resolution. A&A 2020, 640, A69.
Janssen, M.; Falcke, H.; Kadler, M.; et al. Event Horizon Telescope observations of the jet launching and
collimation in Centaurus A. Nature Astronomy 2021, 5, 1017–1028.
Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration.; et al. First Sagittarius A* Event Horizon Telescope Results. II. EHT
and Multiwavelength Observations, Data Processing, and Calibration. ApJ 2022, 930, L13.
Petrov, L.; Kovalev, Y.Y.; Fomalont, E.B.; Gordon, D. The Very Long Baseline Array Galactic Plane
Survey—VGaPS. AJ 2011, 142, 35, [arXiv:astro-ph.CO/1101.1460].

115. Ulich, B.L.; Haas, R.W. Absolute calibration of millimeter-wavelength spectral lines. ApJS 1976, 30, 247–258.
116.

Pearson, T.J.; Readhead, A.C.S. Image Formation by Self-Calibration in Radio Astronomy. ARA&A 1984,
22, 97–130.
Pearson, T.J. Caltech VLBI Analysis Programs, California Institute of Technology. Bulletin of the American
Astronomical Society, 1991, Vol. 23, pp. 991–992.
Issaoun, S.; Johnson, M.D.; Blackburn, L.; Mo´scibrodzka, M.; Chael, A.; Falcke, H. VLBI imaging of black holes
via second moment regularization. A&A 2019, 629, A32, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1908.01296].
Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration.; et al. First M87 Event Horizon Telescope Results. IV. Imaging the
Central Supermassive Black Hole. ApJ 2019, 875, L4, [arXiv:astro-ph.GA/1906.11241].

117.

118.

119.

120. Högbom, J.A. Aperture Synthesis with a Non-Regular Distribution of Interferometer Baselines. A&AS 1974,

15, 417.

121. Clark, B.G. An efﬁcient implementation of the algorithm ’CLEAN’. A&A 1980, 89, 377.
122. Cornwell, T.J. Multiscale CLEAN Deconvolution of Radio Synthesis Images. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in

Signal Processing 2008, 2, 793–801.

123. Conway, J.E.; Cornwell, T.J.; Wilkinson, P.N. Multi-frequency synthesis : a new technique in radio

124.

125.

126.

interferometrie imaging. MNRAS 1990, 246, 490.
Sault, R.J.; Wieringa, M.H. Multi-frequency synthesis techniques in radio interferometric imaging. A&AS 1994,
108, 585–594.
Likhachev, S. Multi-Frequency Imaging for VLBI. Future Directions in High Resolution Astronomy; Romney,
J.; Reid, M., Eds., 2005, Vol. 340, Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc Conference Series, p. 608.
Rau, U.; Cornwell, T.J. A multi-scale multi-frequency deconvolution algorithm for synthesis imaging in radio
interferometry. A&A 2011, 532, A71, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1106.2745].

127. Cornwell, T.J.; Evans, K.F. A simple maximum entropy deconvolution algorithm. A&A 1985, 143, 77–83.
128. Mizuno, Y. GRMHD Simulations and Modeling for Jet Formation and Acceleration Region in AGNs. arXiv

129.

130.

131.

132.

e-prints 2022, p. arXiv:2201.12608, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/2201.12608].
van der Gucht, J.; Davelaar, J.; Hendriks, L.; Porth, O.; Olivares, H.; Mizuno, Y.; Fromm, C.M.; Falcke, H. Deep
Horizon: A machine learning network that recovers accreting black hole parameters. A&A 2020, 636, A94,
[arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1910.13236].
Yao-Yu Lin, J.; Pesce, D.W.; Wong, G.N.; Uppili Arasanipalai, A.; Prather, B.S.; Gammie, C.F. VLBInet: Radio
Interferometry Data Classiﬁcation for EHT with Neural Networks. arXiv e-prints 2021, p. arXiv:2110.07185,
[arXiv:astro-ph.HE/2110.07185].
Fromm, C.M.; Younsi, Z.; Baczko, A.; Mizuno, Y.; Porth, O.; Perucho, M.; Olivares, H.; Nathanail, A.; Angelakis,
E.; Ros, E.; Zensus, J.A.; Rezzolla, L. Using evolutionary algorithms to model relativistic jets. Application to
NGC 1052. A&A 2019, 629, A4, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1904.00106].
Broderick, A.E.; Gold, R.; Karami, M.; et al. THEMIS: A Parameter Estimation Framework for the Event
Horizon Telescope. ApJ 2020, 897, 139.

Universe 2022, VLBI Science Applications, accepted for publication

37 of 39

134.

135.

133.

Jennison, R.C. A phase sensitive interferometer technique for the measurement of the Fourier transforms of
spatial brightness distributions of small angular extent. MNRAS 1958, 118, 276.
Blackburn, L.; Pesce, D.W.; Johnson, M.D.; Wielgus, M.; Chael, A.A.; Christian, P.; Doeleman, S.S. Closure
Statistics in Interferometric Data. ApJ 2020, 894, 31, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1910.02062].
Broderick, A.E.; Pesce, D.W. Closure Traces: Novel Calibration-insensitive Quantities for Radio Astronomy.
ApJ 2020, 904, 126, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/2010.00612].
Thyagarajan, N.; Nityananda, R.; Samuel, J. Invariants in copolar interferometry: An Abelian gauge theory.
Phys. Rev. D 2022, 105, 043019, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/2108.11399].
Readhead, A.C.S.; Wilkinson, P.N. The mapping of compact radio sources from VLBI data. ApJ 1978, 223, 25–36.
137.
138. Cotton, W.D. A method of mapping compact structure in radio sources using VLBI observations. AJ 1979,

136.

84, 1122–1128.

139. Martí-Vidal, I.; Mus, A.; Janssen, M.; de Vicente, P.; González, J. Polarization calibration techniques for the

140.

new-generation VLBI. A&A 2021, 646, A52, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/2012.05581].
Shepherd, M.C. Difmap: an Interactive Program for Synthesis Imaging. Astronomical Data Analysis Software
and Systems VI; Hunt, G.; Payne, H., Eds., 1997, Vol. 125, Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc Conference Series,
p. 77.

141. Offringa, A.R.; Smirnov, O. An optimized algorithm for multiscale wideband deconvolution of radio

astronomical images. MNRAS 2017, 471, 301–316, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1706.06786].

142. Chael, A.A.; Johnson, M.D.; Bouman, K.L.; Blackburn, L.L.; Akiyama, K.; Narayan, R. Interferometric Imaging

Directly with Closure Phases and Closure Amplitudes. ApJ 2018, 857, 23, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1803.07088].

143. Chael, A.A.; Johnson, M.D.; Narayan, R.; Doeleman, S.S.; Wardle, J.F.C.; Bouman, K.L. High-resolution Linear

Polarimetric Imaging for the Event Horizon Telescope. ApJ 2016, 829, 11, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1605.06156].

144. Akiyama, K.; Ikeda, S.; Pleau, M.; Fish, V.L.; Tazaki, F.; Kuramochi, K.; Broderick, A.E.; Dexter, J.; Mo´scibrodzka,
M.; Gowanlock, M.; Honma, M.; Doeleman, S.S. Superresolution Full-polarimetric Imaging for Radio
Interferometry with Sparse Modeling. AJ 2017, 153, 159, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1702.00424].

145. Akiyama, K.; Kuramochi, K.; Ikeda, S.; Fish, V.L.; Tazaki, F.; Honma, M.; Doeleman, S.S.; Broderick, A.E.;
Dexter, J.; Mo´scibrodzka, M.; Bouman, K.L.; Chael, A.A.; Zaizen, M. Imaging the Schwarzschild-radius-scale
ApJ 2017, 838, 1,
Structure of M87 with the Event Horizon Telescope Using Sparse Modeling.
[arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1702.07361].

146. Martí-Vidal, I.; Vlemmings, W.H.T.; Muller, S.; Casey, S. UVMULTIFIT: A versatile tool for ﬁtting astronomical

147.

148.

149.

150.

151.

radio interferometric data. A&A 2014, 563, A136, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1401.4984].
Bezanson, J.; Karpinski, S.; Shah, V.B.; Edelman, A. Julia: A Fast Dynamic Language for Technical Computing.
arXiv e-prints 2012, p. arXiv:1209.5145, [arXiv:cs.PL/1209.5145].
Tiede, P.; Broderick, A.E.; Palumbo, D.C.M. Variational Image Feature Extraction for the Event Horizon
Telescope. ApJ 2022, 925, 122.
Sun, H.; Bouman, K.L.; Tiede, P.; Wang, J.J.; Blunt, S.; Mawet, D. α-deep Probabilistic Inference (α-DPI): Efﬁcient
Uncertainty Quantiﬁcation from Exoplanet Astrometry to Black Hole Feature Extraction. ApJ 2022, 932, 99,
[arXiv:astro-ph.IM/2201.08506].
Sun, H.; Bouman, K.L.; Tiede, P.; Wang, J.J.; Blunt, S.; Mawet, D. alpha-Deep Probabilistic Inference (alpha-DPI):
efﬁcient uncertainty quantiﬁcation from exoplanet astrometry to black hole feature extraction. arXiv e-prints
2022, p. arXiv:2201.08506, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/2201.08506].
Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration.; et al. First Sagittarius A* Event Horizon Telescope Results. III.
Imaging of the Galactic Center Supermassive Black Hole. ApJ 2022, 930, L14.

152. Homan, D.C.; Wardle, J.F.C. Detection and Measurement of Parsec-Scale Circular Polarization in Four AGNS.

AJ 1999, 118, 1942–1962, [arXiv:astro-ph/astro-ph/0007396].

153. Goddi, C.; Moscadelli, L.; Alef, W.; Brand, J. EVN observations of H2O masers towards the high-mass young

154.

stellar object in AFGL 5142. A&A 2004, 420, 929–936, [arXiv:astro-ph/astro-ph/0403408].
Felli, M.; Spencer, R.E. Very Long Baseline Interferometry: Techniques and Applications: proceedings of the NATO
Advanced Study Institute on VLBI; Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1988.

Universe 2022, VLBI Science Applications, accepted for publication

38 of 39

155. Matthews, L.D.; Greenhill, L.J.; Goddi, C.; Chandler, C.J.; Humphreys, E.M.L.; Kunz, M.W. A Feature Movie
of SiO Emission 20-100 AU from the Massive Young Stellar Object Orion Source I. ApJ 2010, 708, 80–92,
[arXiv:astro-ph.SR/0911.2473].
is the primary beam response of an interferometer with unequal elements?
Strom, R. What
European VLBI Network on New Developments in VLBI Science and Technology, 2004, pp. 273–274,
[arXiv:astro-ph/astro-ph/0412687].

156.

157. Chi, S.; Barthel, P.D.; Garrett, M.A. Deep, wide-ﬁeld, global VLBI observations of the Hubble deep ﬁeld north

(HDF-N) and ﬂanking ﬁelds (HFF). A&A 2013, 550, A68, [arXiv:astro-ph.CO/1301.1253].

158. Morgan, J.S.; Mantovani, F.; Deller, A.T.; Brisken, W.; Alef, W.; Middelberg, E.; Nanni, M.; Tingay,
S.J. VLBI imaging throughout the primary beam using accurate UV shifting. A&A 2011, 526, A140,
[arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1302.6040].
van der Tol, S.; Veenboer, B.; Offringa, A.R.
resampling of visibilities. A&A 2018, 616, A27, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1909.07226].

Image Domain Gridding: a fast method for convolutional

159.

160. Cornwell, T.J.; Perley, R.A. Radio-interferometric imaging of very large ﬁelds. The problem of non-coplanar

arrays. A&A 1992, 261, 353–364.

161. Cornwell, T.J.; Golap, K.; Bhatnagar, S. The Noncoplanar Baselines Effect in Radio Interferometry:
IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing 2008, 2, 647–657,

The W-Projection Algorithm.
[arXiv:astro-ph/0807.4161].

162. Middelberg, E.; Deller, A.T.; Norris, R.P.; Fotopoulou, S.; Salvato, M.; Morgan, J.S.; Brisken, W.; Lutz, D.;
Rovilos, E. Mosaiced wide-ﬁeld VLBI observations of the Lockman Hole/XMM. A&A 2013, 551, A97,
[arXiv:astro-ph.CO/1212.4605].
Radcliffe, J.F.; Garrett, M.A.; Beswick, R.J.; Muxlow, T.W.B.; Barthel, P.D.; Deller, A.T.; Middelberg, E.
Multi-source self-calibration: Unveiling the microJy population of compact radio sources. A&A 2016, 587, A85,
[arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1601.04452].

163.

164. Noordam, J.E.; Smirnov, O.M. The MeqTrees software system and its use for third-generation calibration of

165.

166.

radio interferometers. A&A 2010, 524, A61, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1101.1745].
Roelofs, F.; Janssen, M.; Natarajan, I.; et al. SYMBA: An end-to-end VLBI synthetic data generation pipeline.
Simulating Event Horizon Telescope observations of M 87. A&A 2020, 636, A5, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/2004.01161].
Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration.; et al. First M87 Event Horizon Telescope Results. VI. The Shadow
and Mass of the Central Black Hole. ApJ 2019, 875, L6, [arXiv:astro-ph.GA/1906.11243].

167. Wielgus, M.; Akiyama, K.; Blackburn, L.; et al. Monitoring the Morphology of M87* in 2009-2017 with the

168.

169.

170.

171.

Event Horizon Telescope. ApJ 2020, 901, 67, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/2009.11842].
Roelofs, F.; Fromm, C.M.; Mizuno, Y.; Davelaar, J.; Janssen, M.; Younsi, Z.; Rezzolla, L.; Falcke, H. Black hole
parameter estimation with synthetic very long baseline interferometry data from the ground and from space.
A&A 2021, 650, A56, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/2103.16736].
Janssen, M.; Falcke, H.; Kadler, M.; Ros, E.; Wielgus, M.; Akiyama, K.; Balokovi´c, M.; Blackburn, L.; Bouman,
K.L.; Chael, A.; et al.. Event Horizon Telescope observations of the jet launching and collimation in Centaurus
A. Nature Astronomy 2021, 5, 1017–1028, [arXiv:astro-ph.GA/2111.03356].
Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration.; Akiyama, K.; Alberdi, A.; Alef, W.; Asada, K.; Azulay, R.; Baczko,
A.K.; Ball, D.; Balokovi´c, M.; Barrett, J.; et al.. First M87 Event Horizon Telescope Results. V. Physical Origin of
the Asymmetric Ring. ApJ 2019, 875, L5, [arXiv:astro-ph.GA/1906.11242].
Zhao, Z.; An, T.; Lao, B. VLBI Network SIMulator: An Integrated Simulation Tool for Radio Astronomers.
Journal of Korean Astronomical Society 2019, 52, 207–216, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1808.06726].

172. Molenaar, G.; Smirnov, O. Kern. Astronomy and Computing 2018, 24, 45, [arXiv:astro-ph.IM/1710.09145].
173. Davies, J.G.; Anderson, B.; Morison, I. The Jodrell Bank radio-linked interferometer network. Nature 1980,

288, 64–66.

Universe 2022, VLBI Science Applications, accepted for publication

39 of 39

© 2022 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY)
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

