2
2
0
2

p
e
S
6

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
6
4
4
2
0
.
9
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Web3 Challenges and Opportunities for the
Market

Dan Sheridan†, James Harris†, Frank Wear†,Jerry Cowell Jr†, Easton Wong†, Abbas Yazdinejad‡

†College of Computing and Software Engineering, Kennesaw State University, GA, USA
hsherid2@students.kennesaw.edu; Ewong6@students.kennesaw.edu ; jharr651@students.kennesaw.edu;
fwear@students.kennesaw.edu; jcowellj@students.kennesaw.edu
‡Cyber Science Lab, School of Computer Science, University of Guelph, Ontario, Canada
ayazdine@uoguelph.ca

Abstract—The inability of a computer to think has been a limiter in its usefulness and a point of reassurance for humanity since the
ﬁrst computers were created. The semantic web is the ﬁrst step toward removing that barrier, enabling computers to operate based on
conceptual understanding, and AI and ML are the second. Both semantic knowledge and the ability to learn are fundamental to web3,
as are blockchain, decentralization, transactional transparency, and ownership. Web3 is the next generational step in the information
age, where the web evolves into a more digestible medium for users and machines to browse knowledge. The slow introduction of
Web3 across the global software ecosystem will impact the people who enable the current iteration. This evolution of the internet space
will expand the way knowledge is shared, consumed, and owned, which will lessen the requirement for a global standard and allow
data to interact efﬁciently, no matter the construction of the knowledge. The heart of this paper understands the: 1) Enablement of
Web3 across the digital ecosystem. 2) What a Web3 developer will look like. 3) How this alteration will evolve the market around
software and knowledge in general.

Index Terms—Blockchain, Web3, Web3 Developers, Web3 Market, Semantic Web, Web3 Risks.

(cid:70)

1 INTRODUCTION

Decentralization, blockchain technology, and token-based
economics are all concepts incorporated into Web3, a new
iteration of the World Wide Web [1]. The origin of Web3
can be traced to Tim Berners-Lee [2], the founder of the
World Wide Web and the ﬁrst person to summarize and
discuss the idea of Web3, which he originally referred to
as the ”Semantic Web”. However, Web3 is currently de-
ﬁned by a set of principles focused on decentralization,
user ownership of data, and cryptocurrency [3]. Berners-
Lee identiﬁes the initial challenge of creating a system that
allows knowledge sharing with no central governance or
forced commonalities that make sharing inherently tricky.
This idea was partially delivered by introducing search
engines and globally accepted guidelines on structuring
data so that it can be indexed [4], which helped organize
data and make it more accessible. This combination of ”do-
gooding” developers and growing search engines led to
enormous amounts of shared data which is now accessible
to a wide audience [4].

Web3, or the semantic web, has evolved from the idea of
growing the Internet out of this inherent paradox of an ency-
clopedia without a set organization to creator or user owner-
ship of the knowledge and assets that collectively comprise
the Internet. The solution, as identiﬁed by Berners-Lee, is
the ability to pass data along with the rules and logic that
govern it from source to source while attempting to lose as
little information as possible [4]. The implementation of this

solution is now contained in the public blockchains that are
the foundation of cryptocurrencies and smart contracts [5].
This in theory, resolves the limitation of needing developers
to create knowledge in good faith to be able to be shared
and indexed because of the ability to pass logic across the
Internet. Berners-Lee also highlights that the beneﬁts of this
idea are not waiting for an astronomical breakthrough in
technology where ”future software agents. . . can navigate
the wealth of its rich representations.” Instead, it can be
gradually realized as systems provide more detailed infor-
mation [4], and the community makes a conscious effort
to adopt those core principles of knowledge sharing enable-
ment and user ownership. With the connection between sys-
tems through smart contracts, the beneﬁts of a Web3 world
can begin to be realized as greater change comes over time.
This fundamental move to Web3 is not synonymous with
a technology upgrade but rather aligned with a growing
Internet culture focused on data sharing and ownership
that can enable computers to process this data better for
the beneﬁt of the wider community. As Berners-Lee puts it,
”think of the web today as turning all the documents in the
world into one big book, then think [Web3] as turning all the
data into one big database, or one big mathematical formula.
Web3 is not a separate web; it is a new form of information
adding one more dimension to the diversity of the one web
we have today” [4]. Simply put, Web1 was read-only. Web2
was read-write. Web3 is read-write-own [6].

 
 
 
 
 
 
2 FOUNDATION OF WEB3 AND ENABLEMENT

Web3, as mentioned by Berners-Lee, is not going to hinge
on a technological breakthrough, although there is evidence
already of creative libraries that enable Web3 ideas. Web3 is
an ideological shift in how the Internet of data is constructed
that can be enabled with existing technology to produce
beneﬁts today. The enablement of Web3 will depend on
the transition to Web3 libraries and concepts by knowledge
and data creators. The foundational items that currently
comprise the Web3 framework are blockchain networks
(decentralized [7] but connected nodes), Web3 libraries,
emerging specialized languages (Solidity), identity stores
(wallets), smart contracts, and specialized service providers
[8].

2.1 Blockchains (Bitcoin, Ethereum, etc.)

The public blockchains are the core pipelines for all trans-
actions and interactions that occur within Web3 applica-
tions. They are the public ledgers of record, decentralized
and immutable [9]. A global permissionless database that
provides the ability to track the ownership chain of any
asset or piece of data that exists on the blockchain at any
time by anyone. While made popular by cryptocurrencies,
their utility extends to any form of data. This is about
Facebook or any other social network moving your proﬁle
to a blockchain where you have complete control to grant,
revoke, or even sell your data rather than giving it away
for the utility of using the social network. In Web2, the
network controlled and held all the value. The principles
of Web3 dictate that the data holds all the value, not the
network. Web3 is an ideological shift for the Internet, just as
Web2 was for Web1. As users interact across Web3 and its
associated frameworks, there is a functional need to house
the necessary transactions and interactions. The Web3 com-
ponents which provide this service and enable blockchains
to function are known as nodes. Without nodes, the appli-
cations cannot communicate; thus, the decentralization of
applications becomes voided. Nodes facilitate the tracking
of data and are the multiple storehouses that exist to ﬁght
against data loss threats [8] and have additional copies of
the interaction. This also makes transactions veriﬁable and
immutable because this would be the corroborating source
for other Web3 applications.

2

Fig. 1. System targets from a user-centric explainable AI framework [8]

2.3 Identity Stores (Wallets)

With ownership being at the heart of the Web3 principles,
immutable identities are a requirement. Wallets are applica-
tions that store and protect the identity used for interacting
with blockchain and facilitate the literal transaction. This
wallet is the “ﬁnal authority of your data” and can be
any entity [10]. Transactions are totaled here, and all the
interactions with knowledge will also be tracked here.

2.4 Smart Contracts

A smart contract [11] is akin to what Berners-Lee was talking
about when passing the rules along with the knowledge.
Smart contracts act as a conditional mechanism to make
something happen that is fully transparent and separate
from any intermediary to fulﬁll a transaction. Smart con-
tracts rely on nodes to validate the data of a wallet account
and pass in the parameters to provide the output of a
smart contract condition. Essentially, smart contracts are
codes that reﬂect the logic of the transaction two parties are
executing. Every interaction with a smart contract is then
recorded in a ‘block’ on the ‘chain’ by the node executing
the contract [12]. These would act as the access points of
knowledge sharing permission or a point of passing the
universal logic. These concepts have contributed to the early
landscape of Web3 and are critical cogs to a functioning
network of decentralized data points, knowledge sharing,
and registered owners.

2.2 Web3 Libraries

The Web3 libraries provide a set of application program-
ming interfaces to bridge blockchains and smart con-
tracts, enabling the creation of a new class of applica-
tions, commonly known as Decentralized Applications (aka
DApps). By their very deﬁnition, Web3 applications utilize a
blockchain. Ethereum is the most common blockchain used
by DApps as Ethereum was created to support applica-
tion development and has a governance model speciﬁcally
crafted to be developer friendly. Web3.js, Next.js, Ether.js,
and Trufﬂe Suite [8] are commonly used Web3 applica-
tion development libraries, which are all JavaScript based.
Cloudﬂare provides an example of this interaction here,
which hosts an open-source NFT project to explain Web3
and blockchain [10].

2.5 Virtual Reality Systems

Virtual reality has evolved beyond games today, and peo-
ple use it for art, tourism, and industrial purposes [13].
Ticketing or fees must be paid for this purpose, and a
blockchain is an excellent solution for completely secure
payments [13], [14]. Blockchains provide a distributed cryp-
tographic ledger that cannot be trusted. There is no need
for a trusted authority to verify a party’s interaction [15],
[16]. Depending on how users log in and their access rights,
there are different types of blockchain, including private,
public, and consortium. Generally, blockchain-based virtual
reality platforms use a blockchain for supporting Web3 so
that anyone can easily participate. Virtual reality in the
blockchain process involves hashing all the information the

user provides, then encrypting the private key on the user’s
device and generating a digital signature. On a peer-to-peer
(P2P) network, transaction data is sent to peers along with
a digital signature. Using the public key, network members
decrypt the device by comparing its hash against the hash
of the transaction data. Due to the widespread use of Web3
technology, concerns have been raised about information
theft, hacking, dissemination, and copying. Consequently,
many companies are using virtual reality, because they
are unable to limit supply. To support virtual reality in
the middle of Web3, a blockchain is an ideal solution for
creating decentralization, security, and transparency [17],
[18]. The data recorded in the virtual reality system cannot
be altered, and its use can be easily traced. As a result of
utilizing blockchain technology, security is increased, and
the user experience is improved. Virtual reality security and
trust can be improved by utilizing blockchain.

3 A WEB3 DEVELOPER

Web3 as a concept has created a market for developers with
skillsets that can enable and manage the core functions of
knowledge and data-sharing-centric network. With Web3
being tied heavily to the current cryptocurrency infrastruc-
ture that is aligned with the core principles of Web3, there
has been a large move of users contributing to the most
signiﬁcant public GitHub repositories involving the Web3
development stack, according to Richard MacManus at the
New Stack [19] due to the interest stirred by the recent
popularity of cryptocurrency. This population of around
18,000 developers is likely an underestimate of the active
base, as there is no information on the true amount of pri-
vate proprietary Web3 developers. Consensys, the makers
of popular Web3 development tools and services, reported
350,000 active developers using its Infura blockchain devel-
opment platform in November 2021 [20]. By April 2022 – the
time of the creation of this paper – this number had grown to
430,000 active developers [21]. According to the New Stack,
this ﬁgure is a “drop in the bucket,” with the likelihood of
this population growing more in the coming years as this
market has the potential to rapidly expand if the market
for decentralized and interconnected applications becomes
a wider norm for software and technology companies. In
this market, a Web3 developer does not look vastly different
from other developers, with the difference being experi-
enced in the core concepts of blockchain, digital wallets,
smart contracts, and the Web3 libraries mostly written in
JavaScript and Web3 service providers. Familiarity with the
core libraries is important in creating the core functions
of a Web3 app which is no different from other ﬁelds of
software development and relies on knowledge of some
of the most popular languages to create this interaction,
namely JavaScript [8]. The one exception to this assertion
is in the area of smart contracts, which are usually written
in a specialized language in order to optimize performance.
Some of these languages are Solidity, Rust, Yul, Vyper, and
JavaScript. This area is also not restricted in any sense,
with open-source libraries available to whoever wants to
interact and use them. Web3 development looks to involve
more of a fundamental mindset shift in how applications
and functions need to interact and the creation of readable

3

scripts that other applications can tap into as portable
nodes rather than querying a central server, very similar
to querying cloud services. The ability to communicate with
the recording system is essential in being part of this Web3
environment because all interactions across the environment
rely on an audit log with speciﬁc conditions that need
to be passed, sometimes referred to as a ledger – the
blockchain. Experience with data security is also a key trait
for Web3 developers based on the general infrastructure
that Web3 is founded on, passing data around transactions
through ledgers and conditional function codes known as
smart contracts. This interaction is different from most other
central-based systems, where logging is always a reference
point back to internal systems through various inputs rather
than a wider network of checks that are highly portable
and accessible via a blockchain network. Security on a
blockchain is enforced at every entry and execution point on
the chain. If you do not meet the security requirements of
the blockchain, your application will not be able to execute
smart contracts or write to the blockchain. The governing
body of the blockchain sets the security standards, or the
DAO – Decentralized Autonomous Organization – their
published bylaws. Fundamentally, Web3 developers look
very much like other software developers today but work
with specialized concepts and tools speciﬁc to blockchain
technologies. Demand will continue to grow for Web3 de-
velopers. The population of around 430,000 will also enable
these ﬁrst-comers to make potentially ground-breaking con-
tributions to the space and push Web3 forward. The market
will continue to grow for some time, and the developers
looking for new challenges and the likes of the ’do-gooding’
developers that helped push Web2 are most likely going
to join in the coming years. The continual fascination with
blockchain as a technology and its applications will also be
a part of this growing market with estimates as high 34.1%
CAGR (compounded annual growth rates) over the next 10
years [22]. With blockchain being closely tied to Web3 as an
enabler, this will create more developers capable of pushing
the Web3 principles in other areas outside the core areas
right now of banking, cybersecurity, and cryptocurrency.
Developers wishing to explore a shift in their careers can
ﬁnd many helpful free resources, from job boards [23] to
guides to learning Web3 technologies [24], [25].

4 WEB3 IMPACT

In order to understand Web3, we must ﬁrst understand the
place of the web in the network architecture, as shown in
Fig 2 In this way, real-world applications can help us better
understand web functionality.

Web3 aims to be an evolution into an open, permission-
less, decentralized environment for the Internet that will
have widened the scope of knowledge and data accessibility
and fundamentally shifted the economics upon adoption
[26]. Whether this adoption is contingent on technology
or ideology, these principles will hold true on the overall
impact in both the market and the internet ecosystem. The
core impact will be on how computers will interact with
other computers for the beneﬁt of users and who owns
the outcome. This will create smarter searches and better
application of smart technology to put the ownership of

4

guardian, and keeps data from being hidden and controlled
by middlemen that disperse the data not necessarily to the
beneﬁt of the user base [26]. Decentralization of data storage
is a core feature of Web3 that will allow users to create more
content and follow a universal logic to share information
rather than conforming to an intermediary that acts as a
gatekeeper that pushes a framework requirement to best
share out the work [26]. Lessening the effort required to
create new content accessible can make the whole process
of knowledge sharing and value creation a lot faster than it
is today through the use of Web3 principles and technology.

5 WEB3 RISKS

With the emergence of this new Web3 ecosystem which is
projected to have a large swath of inﬂuence, there are some
inherent risks based on the core infrastructure of Web3 and
blockchain technology as a whole [27].

Fig. 2. The place of web in the network architecture

5.1 Lack of Regulation and Oversight

the outcomes in the hands of the users and creators rather
than the intermediaries of Web2. Web3 will be structured
as open-source code, not reliant on the big middlemen
that enable accessing of content today, such as Google,
Microsoft, and Facebook as examples [26]. That is until
Big Tech creates their own blockchains, makes them public,
and incentivizes developers with airdrops backed by the
company’s stock to use their tools and services, making
the developers owners of the company. The development of
Web3 has become transparent to allow software developers
to utilize the growing library of publicly accessible Web3
packages and libraries to build the ecosystem as soon as
information becomes available, accelerating the velocity of
evolution. This availability of the infrastructure will enable
users to create this Web3 ecosystem. A core piece of this
idea is around permissionless technology where interactions
are not reliant on trusted third parties to connect users,
whether through a search engine or transaction machine
[26]. The goal will be to make this feasible by ”blockchain-
like” infrastructure, if not the same libraries that blockchains
use today. The structure acts as its intermediaries, so peer
computers can cut out the requirement of an intermediary
by using universal logic and conditions to have transferable
data ledgers to track transactions and share knowledge
based on rules within the node through smart contracts.
This helps to protect against the concern of data theft by the
current infrastructure of Web2 that enables intermediaries to
capture your data and use it for their purposes, often mon-
etizing it in ways the creators of the data might not agree
with. Allowing the rules and conditions to be transferable
and available without going through an intermediary can
also increase execution speed, transparency, and equitable
ownership. The reliance on large sole sources in the form
of data warehouses that maintain knowledge is most likely
to be disrupted by the principles of knowledge within
Web3. Adopting Web3 as the infrastructure creates more
areas where data is stored, which mitigate major data-loss
threats, keeps data behind rules not maintained by one

Today, blockchain technology interfaces within the Web3
landscape are essentially unregulated, with a general lack
of understanding by most regulators. There are no written
laws or advisory boards overseeing how this ecosystem
operates, which poses a risk of bad actors and bad faith
interactions occurring. This open space of operation has
regulatory boards struggling to deﬁne even the structure of
what are ’entities’ within this operation, such as how even
to deﬁne what a “blockchain-enabled organization” is in
comparison to other companies [28]. Blockchains are oper-
ated by Decentralized Autonomous Organizations (DAO’s)
with varying and non-standard governance models by
common business standards [29]. DAOs are organizations
represented by rules encoded as a transparent computer
program, controlled by the organization members, and not
inﬂuenced by a central government [30]. Transactions pose
another risk based purely on the global scope of how Web3
can interact, with a central point not existing in any of these
ecosystems. For knowledge sharing of particular materials,
the jurisdiction of regulation is unclear because it can exist
in many different environments and tracking a geographic
origin might be impossible. Countries, regions, and govern-
ing bodies have different regulations for more traditional
knowledge sharing that would be disrupted by how Web3
and blockchain operate without a framework to govern this.
With services being provided through a Web3 environment,
there are also ﬁnancial implications in how those are served
and to what body. It is unreasonable to believe that because
there is not one singular regional source that governing bod-
ies will allow transactions to be monitored/taxed without
oversight for a long period of time. This would include
how bad faith transactions would work because currently,
there is no clear operating system to govern and ensure
people are behaving appropriately beyond the bylaws of
the DAOs. Traditional ‘scams’, insider trading, and various
schemes can be adjudicated through justice systems that
are not connected to or cover the framework of Web3’s
blockchains. This new business model of promoting peer-
to-peer transactions now puts the risks with users instead of
what used to be managed by central intermediaries, which is

an inherent risk of working with blockchain technology [31].
For example, a current blockchain/cryptocurrency scheme
that exists (which does not directly tie into Web3 and the
semantic web but provides an overview of potential risks) is
referred to as a crypto pump and dump, which is parallel to
insider trading on big events. An organization will promote
a cryptocurrency they may have a large stake in to push
the value up considerably before cashing out and typically
crashing a currency with new entrants bearing the brunt of
the losses. Because most governing bodies do not consider
cryptocurrency as a security, let alone a commodity or actual
currency, there is no legal precedent for doing anything
about this practice that is parallel to an illegal activity [32].
As Web3 is adopted and operates for a wider audience,
regulation boards should move closer to providing guide-
lines and direction to ensure the safety of consumers and
businesses from bad actors [?]. This will also be a big pillar
of credibility to this area of what exists now as the gray area
with few legal deﬁnitions.

5.2 Portability of Illegal Items

Web3, as professed in the previous material, is focused on
allowing knowledge to be shared without a required frame-
work where information can be easily queried and passed
along with the rules that deﬁne it. The ecosystem now exists
within a connected framework where each node houses the
same universal information that makes traceability hard.
This means bad actors can use these properties to create
material that is easily accessible by the people who want to
view it and hidden from users who do not want to view it
through a major component of Web3 as the smart contract.
Illegal media could more easily exist in a Web3 framework
due to this decentralization that allows creators to be more
inclined to release more of this knowledge and data due
to the inherent security provided by a decentralized and
conditionally accessed piece of knowledge. As a concept,
the portability of illegal items might make other internet
content creators and providers hesitant to begin the full-
on shift based on the services they plan to make available,
especially with no plan/guideline in place to protect against
these questionable practices that, in parallel mediums are
considered illegal [33]. This gap has a market in waiting, so
potentially by the time Web3 is truly ready to be embraced,
companies and services could be available to help combat
this issue with their own version of a secure smart contract
and ledger. This could also be in combination with wider
efforts of regulators to put in place guidelines on the opera-
tion and have a better understanding of this space operates.

5.3 Accuracy of Information

Now that, in the context of Web3, content is easily trans-
missible and not contained to a central source, there lies
a risk with the rapid movement of disinformation [34],
[35]. The ability to send and receive information fast via
a Web3 framework has issues in highlighting good or bad
information. Current state, content creators and providers
have the opportunity to monitor this information and cor-
rect items because it is sourced in their own central area.
Within a Web3 framework, information can pass way faster
with no restrictions and no oversight. This issue is prevalent

today through other semi-decentralized applications such
as WhatsApp, which has had rampant issues in combating
disinformation in its own encrypted messaging platform
[34].

5

5.4 Privacy

With security at the forefront as a beneﬁt for the Web3
framework, there is still a vague gap regarding data privacy
and how interactions will be saved not only for a user’s
wallet but also within the network [32]. If an interaction is
logged within a ledger and that ledger exists everywhere,
what sort of information does the wallet provide to get
in, and will users be able to understand those implica-
tions? This could mean now intermediaries do not control
personal data but potentially their peers. With data being
free ﬂowing in this environment, there seems to be larger
hurdles to surpass for data privacy, primarily when sources
are not centered in regions but exist across networks. A
user-focused approach for Web3 empowers users and the
internet to be focused on them, but that does not provide
them the education on how their information is going to
be processed by each unique system, and this especially
means regulators will not understand this either [32], [36].
Web2 policies around data privacy do not account for this
framework and will need to be updated to account for the
new capabilities of the framework to process information
and store it universally. This alone will put the full onus
on service providers to ensure they store this information
correctly, which is not sufﬁcient without regulatory over-
sight to provide clear direction on what that means. There is
danger in allowing companies to govern themselves because
ensuring that you are constantly doing the right thing does
not always ﬁt with the plan, as we can review countless ﬁrm
practices that have put consumers and users in harm’s way.

5.5 Future Roadmap

Our digital world faces new technologies ( e.g., Software De-
ﬁned Network (SDN) [37], Network functions virtualization
(NFV) [38], Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) [39], Internet of things
(IoT) [40], and Blockchain [41]) that directly and indirectly
affect human life in education, business, industry, and the
military. Combined technologies have also improved con-
struction, energy, and resource efﬁciency [38], [40]. Web3
[42] is one of today’s hottest, most attractive, and most
exciting technologies.

We anticipate that research on Web3 will move towards
quantum, IoT, AI, and secure cloud-assisted areas. The
reason behind this anticipation is the existence of trends
toward the application of security, Quantum, AI, IoT, and
secure cloud-assisted environments are interesting areas for
academic and industry sections [43]. Many companies are
investing in Web3 applications and building their prod-
ucts to support them. Moreover, Fig. 3 summarizes the
widespread involvement of AI and IoT, Quantum with
Web3, for the future. Indeed, it shows that inspired AI
supported Web3 and the ability to Combination of Web3
with other technologies. It can prove these areas will move
toward Web3 quickly.

6

a tremendous opportunity to generate value and wealth
[44], [45], [46].

REFERENCES

[1] M. Kovacova, J. Horak, and M. Higgins, “Behavioral analytics,
immersive technologies, and machine vision algorithms in the
web3-powered metaverse world,” Linguistic and Philosophical In-
vestigations, vol. 21, pp. 57–72, 2022.

[2] G. Kuck, “Tim berners-lee’s semantic web,” SA Journal of Informa-

[3]

tion Management, vol. 6, no. 1, 2004.
J. Beck, “ What is Web3? Here Are Some Way To Explain It To
A Friend,” https://consensys.net/blog/blockchain-explained/
what-is-web3-here-are-some-ways-to-explain-it-to-a-friend/,
2022.

[4] T. Berners-Lee, “The Semantic Web. Tim Berners-Lee - Seman-
tic Web,” https://www.w3.org/2000/Talks/0906-xmlweb-tbl/
text.html.

[5] A. Yazdinejad, H. HaddadPajouh, A. Dehghantanha, R. M. Parizi,
G. Srivastava, and M.-Y. Chen, “Cryptocurrency malware hunting:
A deep recurrent neural network approach,” Applied Soft Comput-
ing, vol. 96, p. 106630, 2020.

[6] C. Dempsey,

“Wang, Angie; Mart,

guide
a-simple-guide-to-the-web3-stack-785240e557f0, 2022.

the Web3

stack,”

to

Justin.

“A simple
https://blog.coinbase.com/

[7] A. Yazdinejad, G. Srivastava, R. M. Parizi, A. Dehghantanha, K.-
K. R. Choo, and M. Aledhari, “Decentralized authentication of
distributed patients in hospital networks using blockchain,” IEEE
journal of biomedical and health informatics, vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 2146–
2156, 2020.

[8] R. Huford, “Hire web3 Developers: Everything You Need
to Know.” Hire Web3 Developers: Everything You Need to
Know,” https://blog.cloudﬂare.com/get-started-web3/,https://
github.com/cloudﬂare/cfweb3, 2022.

[9] A. Yazdinejad, A. Dehghantanha, R. M. Parizi, M. Hammoudeh,
H. Karimipour, and G. Srivastava, “Block hunter: Federated learn-
ing for cyber threat hunting in blockchain-based iiot networks,”
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, pp. 1–1, 2022.

[10] K. Freeman, “Get Started Building web3 Apps with Cloud-
https://blog.cloudﬂare.com/get-started-web3/,https:

ﬂare,”
//github.com/cloudﬂare/cfweb3, 2021.

Fig. 3. Combination of Web3 with other technologies

5.6 Conclusion

Fast forward 10 years – all developers are Web3 developers
of some form. The deﬁnition of ”full stack” will evolve.
Front-end developers will remain focused on the user ex-
perience but may have to deal with additional complexi-
ties of data coming from blockchains or sending data for
smart contract execution. Back-end developers will still deal
with server or cloud application-based logic, but the new
complexities of blockchain and smart contract dependencies
will require new skill development. Blockchain and smart
contract layers will be added to the deﬁnition of ”full stack”,
creating new areas of specialization and opportunities. With
each blockchain transaction being assigned a very speciﬁc
value in terms of the transaction itself and the value of the
data contained in the blocks, security will become a very
acute focus and a specialization unto itself. Web3 security
will be focused on the security of the blockchain and the
smart contracts, the points where the value is created and
stored. Security practices will become ever more integrated
into the code of the applications, increasing the requirement
of developers to obtain new skills and demonstrate secure
coding and development practices. The inherent risks posed
by the current state of Web3 technologies create opportuni-
ties for growth and value creation. Likely, the jobs boom
that occurred as the industry began to understand what
Web2 meant in the context of Web1 will be dwarfed by the
jobs boom Web3 will generate. The fundamental economic
shifts in the ideology of Web3 alone will trigger a tectonic
shift we have never seen before. This, coupled with the
scarcity of resources the industry expects over the next
decade, even without considering the impact of Web3, will
provide developers and other roles in software engineering

[11] A. Singh, R. M. Parizi, Q. Zhang, K.-K. R. Choo, and A. Dehghan-
tanha, “Blockchain smart contracts formalization: Approaches
and challenges to address vulnerabilities,” Computers & Security,
vol. 88, p. 101654, 2020.

[12] M. Hussey, “Daniel Phillips. “What Are Smart Contracts and How
Do They Work?” https://decrypt.co/resources/smart-contracts,
2022.

[13] K. Viswanathan and A. Yazdinejad, “Security considerations for
virtual reality systems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.02563, 2022.
[14] G. Srivastava, R. M. Parizi, and A. Dehghantanha, “The future of
blockchain technology in healthcare internet of things security,”
Blockchain cybersecurity, trust and privacy, pp. 161–184, 2020.
[15] A. Yazdinejad, A. Dehghantanha, H. Karimipour, G. Srivastava,
and R. M. Parizi, “An efﬁcient packet parser architecture for
software-deﬁned 5g networks,” Physical Communication, vol. 53,
p. 101677, 2022.

[16] A. Yazdinejad, R. M. Parizi, A. Dehghantanha, and H. Karimipour,
“Federated learning for drone authentication,” Ad Hoc Networks,
vol. 120, p. 102574, 2021.

[17] A. Yazdinejad, G. Srivastava, R. M. Parizi, A. Dehghantanha,
H. Karimipour, and S. R. Karizno, “Slpow: Secure and low latency
proof of work protocol for blockchain in green iot networks,” in
2020 IEEE 91st Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC2020-Spring).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–5.

[18] A. Yazdinejad, R. M. Parizi, G. Srivastava, A. Dehghantanha, and
K.-K. R. Choo, “Energy efﬁcient decentralized authentication in
internet of underwater things using blockchain,” in 2019 IEEE
Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–6.

[19] R. MacManus,

“Web3 Developer

Steep Uptake

but
web3-developer-ecosystem/, 2021.

in

2021,”

Ecosystem Is

Tiny,
https://thenewstack.io/

[20] C. Blog, “Over 350K Web3 Developers Now Use Blockchain De-

velopment Platform Infura,” 2021.

[21] ConsenSys, “ Homepage with ﬁgure,” https://consensys.net/,

2021.

[22] B. Market,

“Future Market

Insights,”

https://www.

futuremarketinsights.com/reports/blockchain-market, 2022.
[23] Web3.career., “Homepage with job listing,” https://web3.career/.
[24] ——, “Learn Web2 With These Free Resources (Updated 2022),”

https://web3.career/learn-web3, 2022.

[25] M. Nystrom,

Jobs: How to Get
Crypto
2022),”
web3-jobs-how-to-get-a-job-in-crypto-updated-2022, 2022.

in
https://messari.io/article/

(Updated

“Web3

Job

a

7

of Electrical and Computer Engineering (CCECE).
1–4.

IEEE, 2019, pp.

[37] A. Yazdinejad, A. Bohlooli, and K. Jamshidi, “Efﬁcient design and
hardware implementation of the openﬂow v1. 3 switch on the
virtex-6 fpga ml605,” The Journal of Supercomputing, vol. 74, no. 3,
pp. 1299–1320, 2018.

[38] A. Yazdinejad, R. M. Parizi, A. Dehghantanha, Q. Zhang, and K.-
K. R. Choo, “An energy-efﬁcient sdn controller architecture for
iot networks with blockchain-based security,” IEEE Transactions on
Services Computing, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 625–638, 2020.

[39] A. Ekramifard, H. Amintoosi, A. H. Seno, A. Dehghantanha,
and R. M. Parizi, A Systematic Literature Review of Integration of
Blockchain and Artiﬁcial Intelligence. Cham: Springer International
Publishing, 2020, pp. 147–160.

[40] A. Yazdinejad, R. M. Parizi, A. Dehghantanha, H. Karimipour,
G. Srivastava, and M. Aledhari, “Enabling drones in the internet
of things with decentralized blockchain-based security,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 6406–6415, 2020.

[41] A. Yazdinejad, R. M. Parizi, A. Dehghantanha, and K.-K. R. Choo,
“Blockchain-enabled authentication handover with efﬁcient pri-
vacy protection in sdn-based 5g networks,” IEEE Transactions on
Network Science and Engineering, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 1120–1132, 2019.
[42] L. Cao, “Decentralized ai: Edge intelligence and smart blockchain,
metaverse, web3, and desci,” IEEE Intelligent Systems, vol. 37, no. 3,
pp. 6–19, 2022.

[43] B. Zolfaghari, E. Rabieinejad, A. Yazdinejad, R. M. Parizi, and
A. Dehghantanha, “Crypto makes ai evolve,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2206.12669, 2022.

[44] A. D. Carleton, E. Harper, J. E. Robert, M. H. Klein, D. De Niz,
E. Desautels, J. B. Goodenough, C. Holland, I. Ozkaya, D. Schmidt
et al., “Architecting the future of software engineering: A national
agenda for software engineering research and development,”
CARNEGIE-MELLON UNIV PITTSBURGH PA, Tech. Rep., 2021.
[45] Y. Hailemariam, A. Yazdinejad, R. M. Parizi, G. Srivastava, and
A. Dehghantanha, “An empirical evaluation of ai deep explainable
tools,” in 2020 IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps.
IEEE, 2020,
pp. 1–6.

[46] C. M. Kayanan, “A critique of innovation districts: Entrepreneurial
living and the burden of shouldering urban development,” Envi-
ronment and Planning A: Economy and Space, vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 50–66,
2022.

[26] GeeksforGeeks,

“How Web

Digital World?”,”

the
how-web-3-0-is-going-to-impact-the-digital-world/., 2021.

3.0

Impact
https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/

Is Going

to

[27] L. Steinberg.
[28] M. Berberich and M. Steiner, “Blockchain technology and the
gdpr-how to reconcile privacy and distributed ledgers,” Eur. Data
Prot. L. Rev., vol. 2, p. 422, 2016.

[29] A. Yazdinejad, R. M. Parizi, A. Dehghantanha, and K.-K. R. Choo,
“P4-to-blockchain: A secure blockchain-enabled packet parser for
software deﬁned networking,” Computers & Security, vol. 88, p.
101629, 2020.

[30] C. Hackl, “What are daos and why you should pay attention,”

Retrieved June, vol. 1, p. 2021, 2021.

[31] E. Zamani, Y. He, and M. Phillips, “On the security risks of the
blockchain,” Journal of Computer Information Systems, vol. 60, no. 6,
pp. 495–506, 2020.

[32] L. Y. Gely-Rojas, “Cryptocurrencies and the uniform commercial
code: The curious case of bitcoin,” UPR Bus. LJ, vol. 8, p. 129, 2016.
[33] A. Yazdinejad, R. M. Parizi, A. Dehghantanha, G. Srivastava,
S. Mohan, and A. M. Rababah, “Cost optimization of secure
routing with untrusted devices in software deﬁned networking,”
Journal of Parallel and distributed Computing, vol. 143, pp. 36–46,
2020.

[34] A. D. Soto-V´asquez and M. S´anchez-Santos, “El cabal, vacunas,
y donald trump: An analysis of spanish-language disinformation
leading up to the us capitol insurrection,” Cultural Studies Critical
Methodologies, p. 15327086221093949, 2022.

[35] A. Yazdinejadna, R. M. Parizi, A. Dehghantanha, and M. S.
Khan, “A kangaroo-based intrusion detection system on software-
deﬁned networks,” Computer Networks, vol. 184, p. 107688, 2021.

[36] R. M. Parizi, S. Homayoun, A. Yazdinejad, A. Dehghantanha, and
K.-K. R. Choo, “Integrating privacy enhancing techniques into
blockchains using sidechains,” in 2019 IEEE Canadian Conference

