Pulse-Driven Self-Reconfigurable Meta-Antennas 

Daiju Ushikoshi1*, Riku Higashiura1*, Kaito Tachi1*, Ashif Aminulloh Fathnan1*, Suhair 
Mahmood1, Hiroki Takeshita1, Haruki Homma1, Muhammad Rizwan Akram1, Stefano 
Vellucci2, Jiyeon Lee3, Alessandro Toscano2, Filiberto Bilotti2, Christos Christopoulos4 and 
Hiroki Wakatsuchi1,5** 

1Department of Engineering, Nagoya Institute of Technology, Gokiso-cho, Showa, Nagoya, 
Aichi, 466-8555, Japan. 

2Department of Industrial, Electronic, Mechanical Engineering, ROMA TRE University, 
Rome, 00146, Italy. 

3Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of California, San Diego, La 
Jolla, California 92093, USA. 

4The George Green Institute of Electromagnetics Research, Department of Electrical and 
Electronic Engineering, The University of Nottingham, University Park, Nottingham, NG7 
2RD, UK. 

5Precursory Research for Embryonic Science and Technology (PRESTO), Japan Science and 
Technology Agency (JST), Kawaguchi, Saitama, 332-0012, Japan. 

*These authors contributed equally to this work. 
** Corresponding author. E-mail: wakatsuchi.hiroki@nitech.ac.jp. 

((Abstract text)) 

Wireless communications and sensing have notably advanced thanks to the recent 

developments in both software and hardware. Although various modulation schemes have 

been proposed to efficiently use the limited frequency resources by exploiting several degrees 

of freedom, antenna performance is essentially governed by frequency only. Here, we present 

a new antenna design concept based on metasurfaces to manipulate antenna performances in 

response to the time width of electromagnetic pulses. We numerically and experimentally 

show that by using a proper set of spatially arranged metasurfaces loaded with lumped 

circuits, ordinary omnidirectional antennas can be reconfigured by the incident pulse width to 

exhibit directional characteristics varying over hundreds of milliseconds or billions of cycles, 

far beyond conventional performance. We demonstrate that the proposed concept can be 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
applied for sensing, selective reception under simultaneous incidence and mutual 

communications as the first step to expand existing frequency resources based on pulse width.  

1. Introduction 

Wireless communication technologies have advanced at an accelerated rate, especially in 

recent years, due in part to the increasing demands for next-generation applications/services 

such as the Internet of Things (IoT), fifth-generation mobile communication systems (5G) and 

beyond 5G (B5G or 5G+), which manage a substantial number of communication devices 

within a single network.[1,2] In practice, communication devices are permitted to operate only 

in the frequency resources assigned.[3–5] To effectively utilize the assigned frequency 

resources, so far several modulation schemes have been proposed to multiplex the data over 

single channel by using frequency, time or code divisions to increase the throughput and 

hence accommodate more devices within the same wireless networks.[6,7] For instance, within 

a single wireless network using a given frequency resource, different signals can be sent and 

received without interference depending on the modulation scheme used as a frequency, time 

or code division multiple access system. In other words, modulation schemes introduce 

additional degrees of freedom to control signals, enabling simultaneous communications and 

a more efficient use of the limited frequency resources. From the hardware viewpoint, various 

antennas have been developed and explored in depth to satisfy certain requirements, including 

the physical dimensions, weight, materials and costs, while maintaining the expected antenna 

performance metrics, such as radiation pattern, bandwidth, gain and desired input impedance 

to be suitable for applications such as wireless sensing, wireless power transfer, security and 

bioapplications.[8] In general, these performance metrics vary depending on the frequency; 

conversely, antennas transmit/receive signals in the same manner at a fixed frequency. 

However, if we were able to vary such performance metrics at the antenna level itself by 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
introducing an additional degree of freedom, each network could accommodate more 

communication devices without electromagnetic interference, making, thus, a significant 

advancement in wireless communication technology. 

To vary antenna performance, reconfigurability is a typical key factor to consider. In fact, 

reconfigurable antennas are known to exhibit radiation characteristics that can be varied by 

electrical, mechanical (physical) or optical tuning mechanisms even at a constant frequency.[9–

12] However, these mechanisms often rely on external energy resources (e.g., direct-current or 

DC power supplies) that require regular maintenance and thus are not suitable for complicated 

systems containing a large number of wireless communication devices, as expected, for 

instance, in advanced IoT sensor networks for industrial plants, healthcare services and smart 

houses and cities.[13,14] In addition, the quest for the zero-power devices required by the 

current energy/climate challenges is ever growing. Therefore, we propose that reconfigurable 

yet passive antennas will better satisfy the emerging demands for next-generation wireless 

systems. 

Such a passive reconfigurability may be artificially produced by engineered subwavelength 

structures referred to as metamaterials[15,16] and metasurfaces.[17–19] These structures enable a 

straightforward implementation of a variety of electromagnetic features, including negative 

refractive indices[15,16,20] and extremely large impedance surfaces,[17] by suitably designing 

subwavelength unit cells. In fact, antennas designed with metasurfaces have shown 

extraordinary performance/features even beyond conventional physical limitations, such as 

miniaturization,[21] enhanced aperture efficiency,[22] ultrawideband radiation 

characteristics[23,24] and super-resolution.[25,26] Additionally, in wireless communications, 

metasurfaces serve as smart reflective/transmissive surfaces to effectively control the 

communication characteristics, including bit error rates,[27–30] or to convert an incoming wave 
3 

 
 
 
 
 
into a different wavefront.[18,19,29,31-34] A metasurface-coating antenna has also been 

conceptually introduced to reduce the level of interference and provide additional physical 

layer security in wireless communications.[35] 

These metasurfaces artificially produce tailored electromagnetic properties but static or 

invariable responses with linear media. To realize reconfigurability nonlinear metasurfaces 

have been introduced,[36-39] which give an additional state of impedance or electromagnetic 

properties at the same frequency even without external DC power supplies or in a passive 

manner.[40,41] For instance, metasurfaces embedded with schottky diodes were recently 

reported to be capable of discriminating between different waves by sensing the waveforms 

or, more specifically, the pulse widths.[42–47] The antenna design enabled by introducing such 

waveform-selective metasurfaces may allow an additional degree of freedom  than can 

provide high throughput to receive/transmit/sense electromagnetic waves in a narrow 

frequency band as opposed to conventional antennas that require a wide frequency band. 

Potentially, the selectivity of pulse width can be exploited for sharing the same frequency 

resources to increase the number of wireless communication devices within a single network.  

Several studies have validated that radiation characteristics vary in accordance with the pulse 

width.[45,48] However, those studies were limited to numerical simulations without any 

experimental validation. Additionally, none of the previous studies considered more than one 

incident wave source since overlapping pulses were recognized as a single combined pulse  

that could not be separated by conventional waveform-selective metasurfaces.[42–48] Moreover, 

in ordinary communication environments, multiple signals propagate at the same time, which, 

in practice, constrains waveform-selective performance.[6,7] For these reasons, both numerical 

and experimental validations are necessary for alternative passive reconfigurable antenna 

design to independently address multiple signals at the same frequency and at the same time.  

4 

 
 
 
 
 
Here, we present a new antenna paradigm based on waveform-selective metasurfaces that 

permit antenna characteristics to be suitably reconfigured for different waves without external 

energy resources. In particular, we demonstrate the realization of such advanced control by 

spatially constructing different types of waveform-selective metasurfaces as non-uniform 

waveform-selective metasurfaces around a single omnidirectional antenna. Due to this spatial 

configuration, our design is both numerically and experimentally proved to be capable of 

selectively receiving/transmitting pulsed surface waves and free-space waves at the same 

frequency and at the same time in a passive manner. To this end, first we present a design of a 

fundamental single-line system where one of the three types of waveform-selective 

metasurfaces is deployed as a straight line between two grounded monopole antennas to 

control surface wave propagation. These waveform-selective metasurfaces are based on 

periodic hexagonal conducting patches that transmit/absorb surface waves depending on the 

frequency and pulse width. These three types of waveform-selective metasurfaces are then 

integrated as a combined selective multi-line system to vary the direction of surface wave 

propagation over an entire 2D surface, which confirms that our systems have variable 

radiation characteristics at the same frequency. We also show that the proposed concept can 

be extended to design a selective system for free-space wave control by assembling a 

monopole antenna with waveform-selective metasurfaces based on slit (or slot) structures to 

selectively radiate signals in free space. Moreover, we present three specific applications to 

steer a main beam as a passive variable sensor, to receive a signal under simultaneous 

incidence and to build a mutual selective communication system without a frequency change 

or an external energy source. Thus, our study advances the design concept of antennas and 

wireless communication environments at the same frequency by using a new degree of 

freedom, the pulse width.  

5 

 
 
 
 
 
2. Theory 

The proposed antenna concept is based on waveform-selective metasurfaces as explained 

below. Waveform selectivity refers to an electromagnetic response that is strongly coupled to 

the transient responses observed in fundamental electric circuits, more specifically, DC 

circuits.[42–45] Because of this coupling, the difference in between pulses can be sensed by 

waveform-selective metasurfaces, a property which can be used to vary wave propagation as 

well as antenna characteristics. The left panel of Fig. 1a shows two grounded monopole 

antennas linked by a metasurface line composed of nine unit cells, each of which is connected 

to a neighbouring cell by a diode bridge (Figure S1, Table S1 and Table S2 contain the 

specific design parameters). Consistent with other ordinary metasurfaces,[17] this structure 

strongly responds to an incoming surface wave at a resonant frequency, concentrating induced 

electric charges near the gaps between conducting patches. However, the rectification 

performed by the diode bridges generates an infinite set of frequency components, including a 

zero-frequency component, which dominates over any other frequencies. Therefore, transient 

circuit responses appear even at a constant frequency by deploying additional lumped 

components such as a resistor paired by a capacitor or an inductor.[42–44] Specifically, the 

capacitor-based (C-based) waveform-selective metasurface using the top circuit of Fig. 1b 

stores pulsed energy in capacitors at first and later dissipates it in the resistors. Importantly, 

this absorption performance decreases at steady state because the capacitors are fully charged. 

As a result, a long surface wave propagates over the C-based waveform-selective metasurface 

more strongly than a short pulse does. In contrast, the inductor-based (L-based) waveform-

selective metasurface using the middle circuit of Fig. 1b exhibits poor absorptance during an 

initial time period due to the electromotive force of the inductors. Hence, a short pulse can be 

effectively transmitted. However, this force gradually disappears because of the zero 

frequency originated by the diode bridge rectification so that a long pulse is strongly absorbed 

6 

 
 
 
 
by the L-based waveform-selective metasurface. Moreover, the two types of circuit 

configurations can be combined in parallel as a parallel-type (parallel) waveform-selective 

metasurface (see the bottom of Fig. 1b), which strongly absorbs both a short pulse and a 

continuous wave (CW). In this parallel waveform-selective metasurface, the absorption is 

high during an initial time period and gradually decreases since the capacitor is charged up. 

The absorption then increases again due to the decrease of the electromotive force of the 

inductors. Therefore, an intermediate pulse is weakly absorbed and thus transmitted over the 

parallel waveform-selective metasurface. Thus, these three types of waveform-selective 

metasurfaces (i.e., C-based, L-based and parallel waveform-selective metasurfaces) can be 

used to control incident waves in different manners depending on both frequency and pulse 

width. It is noted that the transient responses of these three circuit types are predictable by a 

DC circuit simulation as well as by using analytical calculation[49] (see Figure S2). The time 

constants of the exponentially varying voltages as well as their trends can be determined at 

will, hence facilitating the designs of the waveform-selective metasurfaces. 

Surface wave control has been broadly reported and exploited in antenna applications, while 

most of them deal with frequency selectivity only.[50–54] In contrast, here we propose a 

waveform-selective metasurface to control surface waves such that eventually different 

signals from three antennas can be differentiated even though the signals arrive 

simultaneously at the same frequency.  As the first step, the concept of our antennas can be 

simplified by the equivalent circuit drawn in Fig. 1c. In this figure, a transmitting antenna 

(Tx) is represented by an alternating current (AC) source, a switch, and input impedance Z0, 

while the impedance of a receiver (Rx) is represented by Z1. Additionally, ZR accounts for the 

rest of the energy, e.g., the energy travelling to free space. The energy received by the 

receiver, however, varies depending on the transmission line[55] between the two antennas, 

which is determined by the waveform-selective metasurface line. Note that, for the sake of 

7 

 
 
 
 
simplicity, the equivalent circuit here does not include additional circuit components to 

describe other effects, including the coupling between antennas and the waveform-selective 

metasurface. Nonetheless, these additional effects are fully considered by electromagnetic 

simulations as will be shown in the later parts of this study. 

The transmission between the two antennas can be more precisely calculated by using other 

methods, such as ABCD matrices and the Friis transmission equation.[8] However, one may 

intuitively understand from the simplified equivalent circuit of Fig. 1c that the amount of 

energy transmitted to the receiver depends not only on Z0 and Z1 but also on the transmission 

line in between, which is determined by the type of waveform-selective metasurface and 

varies in behaviour with the incident pulse width. Additionally, connecting more metasurface 

lines to the transmitter potentially influences the radiation direction from the transmitter. In 

this manner, we propose that omnidirectional antennas can be reconfigured to be time-varying 

directional antennas, as demonstrated below. 

3. Results 

3.1. Fundamental Single-Line System 

First, we numerically designed and evaluated waveform-selective metasurfaces using a co-

simulation method of ANSYS Electronics Desktop 2020R2 (see “Simulation Method” of the 

Methods Section and Figure S3), which were experimentally validated (see “Measurement 

Samples” and “Measurement Methods” of the Methods Section and Figure S4). In the 

absence of waveform-selective responses, the monopole antennas used in Fig. 1 were 

numerically adjusted to efficiently radiate signals at approximately 2.4 GHz, as shown in Fig. 

1d. However, the transmittance varied depending on the incident pulse width, as explained 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
above and numerically demonstrated in Fig. 1e (see Figure S5 for power dependence and 

Figure S6 for pulse width dependence). In particular, our waveform-selective metasurfaces 

were also designed to operate at approximately 2.4 GHz by properly choosing design 

parameters including the conducting dimensions, substrate thickness, etc. Importantly, the 

pulsed sine waves used in this study (simply called pulses below) had very narrow spectra 

compared to the bandwidths of both the antennas and the waveform-selective metasurfaces, as 

shown in Fig. 1d (cf. the bandwidth of the pulse in Fig. 1e). This ensured that our antennas 

did not rely on the difference in the frequency spectrum of pulsed sine waves to change the 

transmission characteristics. With a limited power level, these metasurfaces showed the same 

transmittance in the time domain, as their diodes had not yet been turned on (Figure S7).  

However, by increasing the input power to 10 dBm, each type of waveform-selective 

metasurface maximized transmittance at a different time period even at a fixed oscillating 

frequency of 2.4 GHz because of their transient, waveform-selective absorbing mechanisms. 

For instance, as seen in the left panel of Fig. 1f, when the L-based, the parallel and the C-

based waveform-selective meatsurfaces were used between the transmitter and the receiver, a 

transmittance peak appeared near 30 ns, 300 ns and 10 μs, respectively. In other words, most 

of the energy of a short pulse, an intermediate pulse and a long pulse can be effectively 

transmitted by the L-based, the parallel and the C-based waveform-selective metasurfaces, 

respectively. Such transient transmittance was experimentally observed but with a small 

frequency change to 2.42 GHz as shown in the right panel of Fig. 1f (see Fig. 1a for one of the 

measured samples and Figure S8 for the frequency characteristics). Compared to the 

simulation results (the left panel of Fig. 1f) where each transmittance peak was at least 10 dB 

larger than the transmittances of the other curves, in the measurement results (the right panel) 

the vertical gaps between the transmittance peaks and the second highest transmittances were 

reduced to smaller values. This was in part because the lumped circuit components were 

9 

 
 
 
 
soldered by hand, which led to a difference in the amount of the solder used and thus resulted 

in minor frequency shifts. With small frequency adjustments less than 40 MHz, larger 

contrasts between the three transmittances were experimentally obtained in Figure S9. More 

details are seen in Figure S10 and Figure S11. Note that these waveform-selective 

mechanisms can be characterized by the values of the circuit elements, such as capacitance 

and inductance.[49] For instance, the C-based waveform-selective metasurface shown in the 

right panel of Fig. 1f was used again in Fig. 1g but with C increased from 1 nF to 1 μF and 

100 μF. As a result, the transient response appeared even over the order of several hundred 

milliseconds, which corresponds to billions of cycles (see Figure S12 for related simulation 

results). Note that this ultra-transient response was readily designed and experimentally 

validated by replacing discrete capacitor components of the C-based waveform-selective 

metasurfaces (i.e., replacing C of Fig. 1b with a larger capacitance). The other types of 

waveform-selective metasurfaces can operate in a similar time period by using larger circuit 

component values. Theoretically, conventional antennas without waveform-selective 

metasurfaces may be able to achieve the same performance by using an extremely large 

quality factor.[56] Realistically, however, this mechanism becomes ineffective due to the 

presence of even a minor lossy component.  

3.2. Combined Selective Multi-Line System 

Next, we numerically and experimentally demonstrated that the propagation direction of the 

transient antenna design introduced in Fig. 1 can be readily extended by increasing the 

number of variable transmission lines, namely, the number of waveform-selective 

metasurface lines. Fig. 2a shows that a transmitting antenna expressed by an AC source, a 

switch and input impedance Z0 is connected to three variable transmission lines ZC, ZL and ZP 

representing C-based, L-based and parallel waveform-selective metasurface lines, 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
respectively. Z1, Z2 and Z3 denote the impedances of the three receivers. This concept is 

specifically realized by the schematic and the measurement sample of Fig. 2b, where the three 

lines used in Fig. 1f are connected to form a Y shape. In this design, the transmitter is 

positioned at the centre to transmit a signal to the three receivers at the terminals of the 

metasurface lines. Fig. 2c shows both numerically and experimentally that each receiver 

featured a maximum transient transmittance at a different time period since each waveform-

selective metasurface line efficiently transmitted the signal during a different time slot. 

As another planar scenario, hexagonal patches were fully deployed on a conducting ground 

plane to demonstrate that radiation characteristics can be changed over the entire 2D surface 

in Fig. 2d. This structure had a transmitting monopole and three types of waveform-selective 

metasurfaces, as shown in the Y-shaped structure in Fig. 2b. However, each waveform-

selective metasurface occupied one-third of the area around the transmitter so that the 

surrounding waveform-selective metasurface was changed by every 120 degrees of reference 

angle to the transmitter. Under these circumstances, due to the presence of the different 

waveform-selective metasurfaces, the surface wave generated by the omnidirectional 

transmitter was expected to propagate over the ground plane unidirectionally, unlike 

conventional static metasurfaces.[17,53] As shown in Fig. 2e, the change in the radiation pattern 

of the transmitter was measured with the simplified method using three monopole receivers. 

In such transmittance measurements, an average transient transmittance peak first appeared 

between 0.01 and 0.1 μs in the L-based waveform-selective metasurface receiver area (Rx3), 

and then another such peak appeared between 0.1 and 1 μs in the parallel waveform-selective 

metasurface receiver area (Rx2). Finally, a larger transient transmittance was measured in the 

C-based waveform-selective metasurface receiver area (Rx1) at approximately 10 μs. These 

results indicate that most of the energy of a short pulse, an intermediate pulse and a long pulse 

can be effectively radiated to the directions of the L-based, the parallel and the C-based 

11 

 
 
 
 
waveform-selective metasurfaces, respectively. As fundamentally demonstrated in Fig. 1 and 

Fig. 2, these results confirm that the use of non-uniform waveform-selective metasurfaces can 

provide an additional degree of freedom to control surface waves and vary radiation 

characteristics even at the same frequency. Note that our antenna designs demonstrated in Fig. 

2 were spatially constructed with different waveform-selective metasurfaces. This means that 

our antennas used the spatial dimensions as an additional degree of freedom, which is later 

exploited to selectively distinguish different waves even under simultaneous incidence.  

3.3. System for Free-Space Wave Control 

To demonstrate the applicability to waves propagating in a wireless network or in free space, 

we also show that the proposed concept can be used to design a selective system for free-

space wave control, as illustrated in Fig. 3a. In this figure, as seen in Fig. 2a, a transmitter is 

represented by an AC source, a switch and input impedance Z0. In the case of free-space wave 

control, however, C-based, L-based and parallel waveform-selective metasurfaces are used as 

simple planar layers in parallel to the transmitter and, thus, represented by variable shunt 

impedances ZC, ZL and ZP instead of transmission lines that correspond to free space. Z1, Z2 

and Z3, similarly, are the impedances of the three receivers, respectively. To specifically 

design such a system, a transmitting monopole antenna (18 mm tall) is surrounded by a set of 

waveform-selective metasurface panels in Fig. 3b. Note that, for simplicity, this scenario used 

a ground plane and the mirror image of the monopole to readily evaluate the radiation 

characteristics of a dipole antenna suspended in free space, unlike the surface wave cases in 

Fig. 1 and Fig. 2. The waveform-selective metasurfaces used in Fig. 3b were based on slit (or 

slot) structures[44,57] and, thus, designed to strongly transmit incoming signals at a resonant 

frequency (see the structure and frequency characteristics in Figure S13 and Figure S14, 

respectively, and the design parameters in Table S3 and Table S4). However, this resonant 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
mechanism was either maintained or disrupted depending on the three types of waveform-

selective metasurfaces used (two panels each, as shown in Fig. 3b). Note that even though the 

overall metasurface size in two panels was comparable to the wavelength (the dimension was 

equivalent to 0.9λ × 0.65λ) the single meta-atoms are subwavelength (~0.25λ). Thus, the 

metasurface effectively worked as a homogenized surface for the monopole antenna.[21, 22] 

To observe the change in radiation characteristics in a simple manner, we used three 

monopole receivers placed in front of each waveform-selective metasurface (see Figure S15 

and Table S5 and Table S6 for details and design parameters). Under this circumstance, the 

waveform-selective metasurface-based antenna steered the main lobe of the radiation by 

increasing the input power to 30 dBm at 3.85 GHz, as plotted in Fig. 3c (the frequency 

dependences are presented in Figure S16). Note that compared to the surface wave 

demonstrations seen in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2, this configuration used a higher frequency near 3.85 

GHz instead of the frequency region near 2.4 GHz to reduce the dimensions of the 

measurement setup. At first, the signal was most efficiently radiated out of the panels 

containing the L-based waveform-selective metasurfaces, as obtained by Rx1 in Fig. 3b and 

shown by the black curve in Fig. 3c. Then, the L-based waveform-selective metasurface 

gradually reduced the transmittance, but the parallel waveform-selective metasurface started 

strongly transmitting the signal, where Rx2 measured the largest transmittance near 1 μs (see 

the red curve in Fig. 3c). This large transmittance, however, then decreased, while the C-

based waveform-selective metasurface eventually maximized the transmittance, as shown by 

the blue curve in Fig. 3c.  

Next, we compared the simulation results with measurement results. The simulated results in 

Fig. 3c were entirely consistent with the measurements of the sample shown in Fig. 3d, as 

plotted in Fig. 3e, except minor discrepancies in, for instance, the magnitude of transmittance 
13 

 
 
 
 
 
and shift of time scales. Such discrepancies arose primarily due to the presence of some 

additional factors in the experimental case, including extra parasitic circuit components. 

Nonetheless, these measurements ensured the experimental feasibility of the proposed concept 

for free-space waves.  

Furthermore, to experimentally visualize the radiation pattern over a 2D plane, we rotated the 

hexagonal metasurface prism of Fig. 3d every 10º whilst monitoring the transmittance from a 

monopole receiver in a far-field distance as seen in Fig. 3f. Consistent with the above 

simulation and measurement results, the radiation patterns plotted in Fig. 3g indicated that the 

maximum antenna directivity was achieved towards three different angles depending on the 

time period of the signal. The radiation pattern also clarified that the corner direction of each 

metasurface panel gave the highest transmittance as seen, for example, in 0.02 μs (the black 

lines in Fig. 3g), where the maximum transmittance was observed at 60º angle corresponding 

to the corner direction of the L-based waveform-selective metasurface panels. The side-lobe 

level in this time was 10 dB lower than the peak, indicating that receiving antennas located in 

other directions would receive low-intensity signals from the transmitter (see Figure S17 for 

the full time-varying far-field pattern). Besides the above 2D far-field profile, to get a clearer 

picture of interference paths, such as crosstalk, we have estimated the coupling from the 

transmitter to a receiver via the other two external antennas, and the result is shown in Figure 

S18. The calculated crosstalk was much lower than the power through the main path while in 

the measurement they differed by at least 20 dB.  

As a reference result, Figure S19 shows simulation results where all the transmittances 

remained the same and constant when the input power level was not large enough to turn the 

diodes on. Additionally, Figure S20 represents the simulation results using only one of the 

three waveform-selective metasurfaces for all six panels. As shown in Figure S20, transient 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
transmittance varied if the incident power was sufficiently large, but all the receivers received 

the same amount of energy, which indicates that the radiation characteristic was transient but 

omnidirectional. Note that as mentioned in Fig. 2, the antenna design of Fig. 3 was also 

spatially constructed with different waveform-selective metasurfaces. In other words, spatial 

dimensions were used as an additional degree of freedom, which plays an important role to 

separate different pulsed signals even at the same time as demonstrated in the following part 

of our study. Also, as mentioned in Fig. 2, the results of Fig. 3 indicate that most of the energy 

of a pulsed signal is effectively radiated to different directions depending on the pulse width 

(e.g., a short pulse to the direction of the L-based waveform-selective metasurface receiver).  

3.4. Passive Variable Sensor 

Now that we have so far designed and validated the antennas to vary radiation characteristics 

at the same frequency depending on the pulse width of a surface wave and a free-space wave, 

we use the proposed metasurface-based antennas in three different situations to explore how 

such ultra-transient directional antennas can be used for practical applications, even under the 

restriction of a single frequency band due to a limited frequency resource. In Fig. 3, the 

antenna was shown to steer the main lobe or transmit a signal to different receivers, which fits 

in existing wireless communication environments to vary the radiation characteristics and 

avoid electromagnetic interference. However, we propose an additional application using the 

reflected waveform of the transmitted signal to detect a scattering object as a passive yet 

variable sensor. As shown in Fig. 4a, a copper plate (51 mm tall and 70 mm wide) was placed 

in front of the antenna shown in Fig. 3. Note that we changed the location of the copper plate, 

which also influenced the reflectance in the time domain as the radiation characteristics of the 

antenna depend on the pulse width. Therefore, these results were compared to the reflectance 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
without the copper plate to detect the difference in between and where the plate was 

positioned.  

Under these circumstances, as shown in Figure S21a and more clarified in Fig. 4b, the 

transient reflectance experimentally increased during different time slots depending on the 

conductor position. Specifically, in contrast to the result obtained without the copper plate 

(Figure S21a), when the copper plate was located in front of the L-based waveform-selective 

metasurface panels, which efficiently radiated an electromagnetic wave during the initial time 

period, there was a larger transient reflectance until 0.2 μs. Similarly, the transient reflectance 

increased at approximately 1 μs and 10 μs when the plate was positioned in front of the 

parallel and C-based waveform-selective metasurface panels, respectively. These differences 

in reflectance appeared even if more than one copper plate were deployed, as demonstrated in 

Fig. 4c and Figure S21b. As seen in the black curve of Fig. 4c, for instance, a reflectance 

increased during an initial time period and near 1 μs, when two copper plates were positioned 

in front of the L-based and parallel waveform-selective metasurfaces, since they 

independently increased transmittance during these time slots. These results indicate that 

multiple objects can be sensed by using several types of waveform-selective metasurfaces or 

non-uniform waveform-selective metasurfaces. Moreover, the distances between the copper 

plates and these waveform-selective metasurfaces were changed in Fig. 4d and Figure S21c. 

As seen in Fig. 4d, the increase in reflectance was relatively limited during an initial time 

period when the distance between one of the copper plates and the L-based waveform-

selective metasurface increased. In contrast, the gap between the two curves in Fig. 4d was 

relatively small near 1 μs, since the distance of another copper plate to the parallel waveform-

selective metasurface was fixed. Thus, these results demonstrate that the distance to a 

scattering object can be detected from the difference in reflected waveforms. Additional 

16 

 
 
 
 
results are seen in Figure S22. In this figure, reflectances are shown as a function of the 

distance between the monopole antenna and a copper plate.   

In conventional methods to detect the direction of a scattering object, an antenna or a sensor 

(or a radar) usually changes its direction or posture as seen in parabolic antennas, adjusts the 

input phase as seen in phased arrays or sweeps the frequency component as a chirp signal.[8] 

Without any of these active changes, however, our waveform-selective metasurface-based 

antennas can potentially detect the location of scattering objects since the antennas keep 

varying their main lobes depending on pulse width, which is exploited as a new degree of 

freedom in wireless communications. Also, the proposed method only used a single 

transmitter unlike phased arrays composed of several radiating elements and phase shifters or 

adjustment components. Moreover, no duplexer was needed to perform detection even though 

only a single antenna was used. It is noted that our prototype here preferentially selected only 

three different angles. To increase the angular resolution, the metasurface can be arranged as a 

polygon with a higher number of sides that are associated with different waveform-selective 

functionalities. The metasurface antenna here detected objects and instantly differentiated 

their distances, while the detection reliability was limited by the noise floor as seen in Fig. 4d. 

Therefore, the performance can be improved by several factors including the number of sides, 

complexity in the circuit realization and the monopole antenna setups. 

3.5. Selective Reception under Simultaneous Incidence 

The second application is the selective reception of simultaneous incidences. From the 

viewpoint of efficient communication systems/environments, many signals may travel at the 

same time to increase the entire spatial data transfer rate. However, none of the waveform-

selective metasurfaces that have been reported thus far is capable of distinguishing different 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
pulsed waves if the signals arrive at the same time since the pulses are received as a single 

combined signal.[42–48] We addressed this issue in Fig. 5, where the central grounded 

monopole (effectively dipole) shown in Fig. 3 was placed near different types of waveform-

selective metasurfaces that were spatially constructed to face different directions. This implies 

that our configuration exploited spatial dimensions as an additional degree of freedom (see 

Fig. 3a). Therefore, the proposed antenna design can be used for selectively receiving a pulsed 

signal from a particular incident angle.  

Fig. 5a shows the simulation model tested using the same configuration as that in Fig. 3 but 

using the central antenna as a receiver and the three external antennas as transmitters, each of 

which generated a sine wave of 3.85 GHz (30 dBm) with a different phase offset, specifically, 

-120, 0 and +120 degrees for Tx1, Tx2 and Tx3, respectively. In this case, if the three signals 

have the same input power level, the total power received at the central receiver becomes 

ideally zero (or practically low) since the three incident signals cancel out each other, unless 

these signals are selectively filtered by waveform-selective metasurfaces. Therefore, the phase 

offset of the external transmitters clarify which signal dominated others even at the same 

frequency, as well as the direction of the signal source. Additionally, the distance between the 

central receiver and the external transmitters was reduced to ensure a sufficiently large input 

power for the measurements (see Figure S23 using the previous far-field distance).  

First, when only one of the transmitters generated a signal, the simulation result was obtained, 

as plotted in the left panel of Fig. 5b. According to this result, transient transmittance was 

maximized during different time ranges, depending on which transmitter sent the signal. In 

addition, when more than one transmitter was activated, multiple transmittance peaks 

appeared, as plotted in the right panel of Fig. 5b. In particular, the three-source case turned 

out to follow the largest values among the three individual curves (see the left panel of Fig. 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
5b). To more clearly analyse the primary signal source, the voltage of the received signal was 

investigated in the time domain. According to the phases calculated in Fig. 5c (or the time of 

zero voltage), only one of the three signals was found to be relatively dominant across three 

time periods (i.e., approximately 0.05, 0.45 and 10 μs). This result indicates that by 

combining non-uniform waveform-selective metasurfaces with angular (or spatial) 

characteristics, different signals can be selectively received at the same frequency, even if the 

signals enter the proposed antenna at the same time. In addition, experimental validation is 

provided in Fig. 5d, Fig. 5e and Fig. 5f. In these measurements, basically we used the same 

conditions as the ones applied to the simulations in Fig. 5a, Fig. 5b and Fig. 5c except for the 

input power adjusted to 36 dBm (see the detailed measurement method in Figure S24 and 

“Measurement Methods” in the Methods Section). First, as seen in Fig. 5b, the measurement 

results seen in Fig. 5e showed similar transmittance peaks with minor shifts in the time 

domain due to several factors including the absence of solder and some additional parasitic 

circuit parameters that were not fully included in the simulations and affected the time 

constants of Fig. 5e. Despite these time-domain shifts, however, a single transmitted signal 

was found to dominate over the others, as shown in Fig. 5f. When all the three transmitters 

generated signals, the magnitude of the transmitted voltage slightly changed due to the 

interference between all the three signals. However, the phase remained almost the same as 

that of each dominant signal. These results experimentally confirm that the proposed antenna 

is capable of selectively receiving different pulses even under simultaneous incidences. Note 

that, as mentioned above, conventional design of waveform-selective metasurfaces or related 

antennas suffered from the fact that multiple pulsed signals arriving at the same time appeared 

as a single combined pulse that could not be distinguished by previous waveform selectivities. 

However, this drawback is overcome in the proposed antenna design concept by using spatial 

dimensions as an additional degree of freedom.  

19 

 
 
 
 
3.6. Mutually Selective Communication System 

As the third application, we show that waveform selectivity can be exploited by multiple 

antennas to design a mutually pulse-width-selective communication system. In Fig. 3 and Fig. 

5, only one antenna was permitted to selectively transmit/receive a pulsed signal in 

accordance with the pulse width. In contrast, the system proposed here is one step closer to a 

realistic wireless communication environment where ideally several antennas are expected to 

transmit and receive signals at the same time to increase the data transfer rate of the entire 

space. To realize such a system, the waveform-selective metasurface panels used only for a 

transmitter in Fig. 3 can be deployed for the three external antennas, since these external 

antennas are also given waveform-selective radiation characteristics, which means that 

mutually pulse-width-selective communications are established between any pair of antennas.  

For simplicity, such a communication system was demonstrated using surface waves together 

with the three waveform-selective metasurface lines used in Fig. 2b. However, the three 

metasurface lines were combined to form a triangle shape instead of a Y shape in Fig. 6a. 

Each corner had a grounded monopole so that all the paths between the three antennas were 

connected by either a C-based, an L-based or a parallel waveform-selective metasurface to 

independently use different types of waveform selectivities without severely interfering with 

the other paths. Additionally, the antennas were programmed to generate a sine wave (10 

dBm at 2.36 GHz) with a phase offset of -120, 0 or +120 degrees.  

Under these circumstances, when only one of the three antennas generated a signal, the 

transmittances to the other two receivers were maximized in different time slots, as shown in 

Fig. 6b. This demonstrates selective transmission to the receiving antennas. Additionally, Fig. 

6c shows that different signals were selectively received in different time ranges. In other 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
words, the communication system shown in Fig. 6a exhibited not only the selective 

transmission capability (as presented in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3) but also the selective reception 

capability (as shown in Fig. 5), both of which were observed in every single antenna element 

of Fig. 6a.  

The proposed system was experimentally validated using the measurement sample of Fig. 6d 

and the method introduced in Fig. 5 (see Figure S24). As a result, similar trends were obtained 

in Fig. 6e, where signals were selectively transmitted to receivers. In addition, two 

transmittance peaks appeared in each case of Fig. 6f even if two signals were simultaneously 

excited. Note that the locations of the two peaks were close to the peaks of the single source 

cases (i.e., compare the blue curves to the black and the red curves). These measurement 

results showed minor differences with the simulation results in Fig. 6b and Fig. 6c in terms of 

the magnitudes of the transmittances and the locations of the transmittance peaks. 

Nevertheless, the proposed mutually pulse-width-selective communication system was both 

numerically and experimentally validated.  

4. Discussion 

In this study, we demonstrated a proof-of-concept of pulse-driven self-reconfigurable 

antennas that contained several types of waveform-selective metasurfaces. Despite their 

simple configurations, the proposed antennas enabled successful variation of the antenna 

characteristics depending on the pulse width even at the same frequency. Specifically, Fig. 1 

and Fig. 2 showed antennas generating surface waves that propagated in accordance with 

pulse width, while Fig. 3 demonstrated how free-space wave radiation changed at a constant 

frequency. However, in order to facilitate application of the proposed antennas, performance 

may need to be further optimized. For instance, Fig. 4 showed the application of a prototype 

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
antenna to sense a scattering object by varying the pulse width. This sensing capability was 

limited due to reflection from the waveform-selective metasurface panels since only one of 

the three types of panels permitted a signal to radiate out, while the other two types reflected 

the signal to the transmitting monopole, which appeared as a relatively strong reflection (see 

the results without copper plates in Figure S21). This performance can potentially be 

improved by introducing strong nonreciprocity into the waveform-selective metasurfaces.[58] 

In this way, the signal from the transmitting antenna would pass through the metasurfaces, but 

only the propagation from the outside to the antenna (only the wave reflected from the 

outside) would be selectively filtered so that the reflectance curve without the conductor plate 

in Figure S21 is significantly lowered to recognize objects that require much higher 

sensitivities. Additionally, our antennas relied on the diodes of commercial products. For this 

reason, the minimum power and dynamic range to achieve waveform selectivities or exploit 

pulse-driven reconfigurability were limited, as the diodes used had a turn-on voltage and a 

break-down voltage of finite values (approximately 0.3 V and 7.0 V, respectively). Between 

these voltages, diodes can be used to rectify incoming signals and achieve waveform-selective 

antenna performance. In particular, the turn-on voltage is important in wireless 

communications. In Fig. 3, for example, the incident power level was set to 30 dBm, which 

was much higher than ordinary communication signal levels (e.g., -70 dBm). Within the 

choice of commercial products, Schottky diodes as used in this work have a lower turn-on 

voltage than PIN diodes, but have higher equivalent resistance that potentially adds an ohmic 

loss leading to a reduced radiation efficiency. Enhanced performance can be achieved by 

using advanced semiconductor technologies, such as the latest microfabrication process, 

especially to lower the turn-on voltage of the diodes. Moreover, we note that compared to the 

simulation results, the measurement results showed a reduced transmittance or a reduced 

efficiency due to parasitic losses introduced during the fabrication process such as soldering 

of the surface mount devices (SMD). In Figure S25 we estimated the reduced transmittance 

22 

 
 
 
by deliberately adding parasitic losses in the simulation and showed that an additional 100-Ω 

series resistance yielded a comparable transmittance profile to the measurement. To enhance 

the efficiency of the metasurface, a reliable fabrication process may be used to minimize the 

parasitic losses from SMD soldering.  Despite the possibility of improving performance, the 

concept of the proposed antenna designs provides a new degree of freedom to control 

electromagnetic waves or wireless communication signals even at the same frequency which 

has not been shown previously. This was demonstrated here as selective transmitters in Fig. 1 

to Fig. 3, a passive variable sensor in Fig. 4, a selective receiver in Fig. 5 and a mutual 

selective communication system in Fig. 6.  

In the geometrical context, the hexagonal prism shape composed of the metasurface panels in 

Fig. 3 was meant to show the controllable radiation pattern depending on time, which is 

extensible into more than three angles. The metasurface prism can be arranged as a regular 

polygon with a reduced side number such as an equilateral triangle. However, the prism side 

length determined by the dimensions of metasurface panels should be carefully adjusted to 

maintain appropriate distance between the transmitting monopole and the metasurface panels, 

avoiding destructive phase interference (see Figure S26 for the analysis on triangular 

metasurface prisms). Additionally, a regular polygon with a higher number of sides such as a 

decagonal prism may increase the polygon radius too much, which exponentially increases the 

power requirement to achieve waveform-selective profiles.  As for relations with the distance 

between the receivers and the directivity of the transmissive antennas, Friis transmission 

equation may be used to briefly approximate the power of the secondary reflections from 

external antennas. The power received by an antenna 

 in decibel is 

. Here, 

 is the transmitted power, 

𝑃𝑃𝑅𝑅
 and 

𝑃𝑃𝑅𝑅   =   𝑃𝑃𝑇𝑇 + 𝐺𝐺𝑇𝑇 + 𝐺𝐺𝑅𝑅 +
 are the gains of the transmitter 

 20log (𝜆𝜆/4𝜋𝜋𝜋𝜋)
and the receiver, respectively, and 

𝑃𝑃𝑇𝑇

𝐺𝐺𝑇𝑇

𝐺𝐺𝑅𝑅

) is the distance-dependent power reduction 

where 

𝜆𝜆

 is the operating wavelength and 

20log (𝜆𝜆/4𝜋𝜋𝜋𝜋

 is the distance between the two antennas 

23 

𝜋𝜋

 
 
 
 
considered. In the case of the metasurface in Fig. 3b, the power received by Rx2 via Rx1 was 

-28.45 dBm according to the Friis formula, considering that the simulated gain of the 

monopole antennas was 

 and the transmitted power was 

 dBm. 

This calculated received power was approximately the same as the measured power as seen in 

𝐺𝐺𝑇𝑇 = 𝐺𝐺𝑅𝑅 = 3.25 dB

𝑃𝑃𝑇𝑇   = 0

Figure S18d which was around -28 dBm, confirming that there was only limited influence of 

the secondary reflections from external antennas via the metasurface panels. 

From the viewpoint of efficiently utilizing frequency resources, the performance of our 

antenna design depends on the number of pulses that are selectively received/transmitted. As 

presented above (e.g., Fig. 1g and Figure S11), the transient responses basically follow 

exponential functions determined by time constants.[49] For this reason, only three different 

pulses (short, intermediate and long pulses) were unambiguously distinguished by our 

prototype antenna up to 10 μs as shown in Fig. 5. Communication signals can be more 

efficiently used by increasing the number of separated pulses, which is achieved by adding 

more metasurface filters. However, such improvement may be hampered by several 

fundamental restrictions including the slow mechanism to obtain transmittance variation that 

is based on the transient responses following exponential functions. Although this slow 

variation may still be acceptable in a small number of filtering such as shown in this work, it 

is likely to impose tight limitations when a higher number of filters is used. Therefore, a new 

mechanism is needed to go beyond this ordinary waveform-selective response that is not 

limited by exponentially time-varying voltages of RLC circuits. Nonetheless, we 

demonstrated that the proposed antenna design is experimentally realizable with quite long 

pulses even beyond many practical pulse width ranges, reaching billions of cycles or several 

hundred milliseconds (Fig. 1g). Performance can be further extended by replacing the lumped 

circuit components since their values relate to time constants that determine how the 

24 

 
 
 
 
waveform selectivity or transient response is characterized (see past studies with respect to 

more advanced pulse controls[59] and equivalent circuit models for time constants[49]). 

Additionally, for the efficient use of frequency resources, different modulation schemes can 

be combined to accommodate more communication devices in a single wireless network.[6,7] 

In recent years, orbital angular momentum (OAM) has been widely explored in which  

additional degrees of freedom can be achieved at the same frequency by exploiting orbital 

momenta of waves along with the established spin momenta, i.e., left/right hand circularly 

polarized waves.[33,60] Although the OAM is simple in concept and efficient multiplexing can 

be achieved, implementing the OAM technique in an antenna through the use of a 

metasurface usually requires a large design thickness that is proportional to the wavelength, 

which is acceptable in the optical range but not at lower frequencies. Additionally, the 

challenging design of receiver antennas to detect OAM waves in the far-field makes it nearly 

impossible to utilize for long-distance communications. In contrast, our waveform-selective 

metasurfaces can be designed with a subwavelength thickness and be installed directly to an 

antenna anywhere in a wireless network environment.[45] Nevertheless, the concept of 

waveform selectivity can be integrated with the OAM as well as with other modulation 

schemes[6,7] to accommodate an increasing number of wireless communication devices in a 

single wireless network and to more effectively share the same frequency resource. With such 

a potential, our study is expected to advance the design concept of antennas and wireless 

communication environments at the same frequency and become the first step to expand 

existing frequency resources by using a new additional degree of freedom, the pulse width.  

5. Conclusion 

25 

 
 
 
 
 
 
In conclusion, we have presented a design concept of metasurface-based antennas and their 

applications to reconfigure antenna characteristics at the same frequency without external 

energy resources, namely, in a passive manner. The proposed antennas exhibited ultra-

transient, pulse-width-selective characteristics that enabled the realization of varied scattering 

parameters at a constant frequency over several hundred milliseconds. This capability is not 

practically achievable by conventional antenna design methods but was made possible by the 

utilization of waveform-selective metasurfaces. In particular, the use of spatially constructed 

non-uniform waveform-selective metasurfaces led to selective control of the radiation 

characteristics of ordinary omnidirectional antennas, which were validated both numerically 

and experimentally. Finally, these antennas were used in three applications, specifically to 

steer a main beam as a passive yet variable sensor, to receive a signal under simultaneous 

incidence and to build a mutually selective communication system without a frequency 

change or an external energy source. Unlike previous studies which were limited to 

simulations only and a single signal source, our study both numerically and experimentally 

verified selective transmission and reception even under simultaneous incidence as often seen 

in realistic communication environments. Our study is expected to provide a new degree of 

freedom to design wireless communication systems and to contribute to the efficient use of 

limited frequency resources in the next generation of communication environments. 

6. Methods 

Simulation Method: We designed and evaluated antennas based on waveform-selective 

metasurfaces by using a co-simulation method[42–44] that integrated an electromagnetic (EM) 

solver with a circuit simulator within ANSYS Electronics Desktop 2020 R2. In this method, 

first, the EM models were simulated in the EM solver without lumped circuit components that 

were replaced by lumped ports (Figure S3). The scattering parameters obtained in the EM 

solver were then used in the circuit simulator along with the lumped components connected to 

26 

 
 
 
 
 
the lumped ports. This method is equivalent to directly connecting the lumped components to 

the EM models in the EM solver, although it significantly improves the simulation efficiency 

and contributes to optimizing the antenna models. We note that diodes were properly 

simulated using the corresponding SPICE model where nonlinearity was included. Unlike 

other simulation methods based on time-domain analysis such as the Finite Difference Time 

Domain (FDTD) method or the Transmission Line Modelling (TLM) method,[61] the co-

simulation method performs transient analysis within the circuit level, which does not 

normally produce field distributions but more efficiently provides voltages and currents at 

discrete circuit components.  

Measurement Samples: Our waveform-selective metasurfaces were fabricated using 

Rogers3010 substrates (1.27 mm thick) and Broadcom HSMS-286X series product diodes. 

The design parameter details are given in Table S1, Table S2, Table S3, Table S4, Table S5 

and Table S6. The conducting patterns were covered by coating layers to prevent the 

influence of oxidation and to facilitate the soldering process. Additionally, the front surface of 

the measurement sample used in Fig. 2d was mostly covered by a resist that helped limit the 

solder area. 

Measurement Methods: As shown in Figure S4, input signals were generated by a signal 

generator (Anritsu MG3692C) or an arbitrary waveform generator (AWG) (Keysight 

Technologies M8195A). In particular, the AWG was used to generate pulses longer than 10 

μs, as shown in Fig. 1g. The duty cycles of the pulsed signals were set to 0.1 % or less to 

ensure that the pulse periods were relatively long enough, compared to the pulse width. This 

was because the electric potential within diode bridges needed to be restored to zero voltage 

before a next pulse came in. If the power levels were too small, an amplifier (Ophir 5193RF) 

was used to ensure that the incident power levels were sufficient to realize waveform-

27 

 
 
 
 
 
selective responses. The reflection to the amplifier was reduced by an isolator (Pasternack 

PE83IR1004). For the measurements of Fig. 5 and Fig. 6, a divider (Clear Microwave 

D38004), phase shifters (Pasternack PE8245) and a coupler (ET Industries C-058-30) were 

additionally used (for instance, see Figure S23 for the setup of Fig. 5). The incident, reflected 

and transmitted powers/energies were measured using an oscilloscope (Keysight 

Technologies DSOX6002A or Teledyne LeCroy WaveRunner9404 M). The frequency 

characteristics of the proposed antennas were measured by using a vector network analyser 

(VNA) (Keysight Technologies N5249A). 

Data availability  

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author 

upon reasonable request.  

Code availability  

The codes that are used to generate results in the paper are available from the corresponding 

author upon reasonable request. 

References 
[1] Dang, S., Amin, O., Shihada, B. & Alouini, M.-S. What should 6G be? Nat. Electron. 3, 
20-29 (2020). 

[2] Al-Fuqaha, A. et al. Internet of things: A survey on enabling technologies, protocols, and 
applications. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutorials 17, 2347-2376 (2015). 

 [3] THE EUROPEAN TABLE OF FREQUENCY ALLOCATIONS AND APPLICATIONS IN 
THE FREQUENCY RANGE 8.3 KHz to 3000 GHz (ECA TABLE) Approved November 2020, 
2020. 

[4] FCC ONLINE TABLE OF FREQUENCY ALLOCATIONS47 C.F.R. § 2.106 Revised on 
February 1, 2021, 2021. 

[5] MIC Frequency Assignment Plan, September 2021, 2021. 

28 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[6] Goldsmith, A. Wireless Communications (Cambridge Univ. Press, 2005). 

[7] Hanzo, L., Ng, S. X., Webb, W. & Keller, T. Quadrature Amplitude Modulation: From 
Basics to Adaptive Trellis-Coded, Turbo-Equalised and Space-Time Coded OFDM, CDMA 
and MC-CDMA Systems (IEEE Press-John Wiley, 2004). 

[8] Balanis, C. A. Antenna Theory: Analysis and Design (John Wiley & Sons, 2016). 

[9] Hum, S. V. & Perruisseau-Carrier, J. Reconfigurable reflectarrays and array lenses for 
dynamic antenna beam control: A review. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 62, 183-198 (2014). 

[10] Huang, C. et al. Reconfigurable intelligent surfaces for energy efficiency in wireless 
communication. IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. 18, 4157-4170 (2019). 

[11] Christodoulou, C. G., Tawk, Y., Lane, S. A & Erwin, S. R. Reconfigurable antennas for 
wireless and space applications. Proc. IEEE 100, 2250-2261 (2012). 

[12] Wu, C. et al. A phased array based on large-area electronics that operates at gigahertz 
frequency. Nat. Electron. 4, 757-766, (2021). 

[13] Stankovic, J. A. Research directions for the internet of things. IEEE Internet Things J. 1, 
3-9 (2014). 

[14] Zanella, A. et al. Internet of things for smart cities. IEEE Internet Things J. 1, 22-32 
(2014). 

[15] Smith, D. R. et al. Composite medium with simultaneously negative permeability and 
permittivity. Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 4184 (2000). 

[16] Shelby, R. A., Smith, D. R. & Schultz, S. Experimental verification of a negative index 
of refraction. Science 292, 77-79 (2001). 

[17] Sievenpiper, D. et al. High-impedance electromagnetic surfaces with a forbidden 
frequency band. IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech. 47, 2059-2074 (1999). 

[18] Yu, N. et al. Light propagation with phase discontinuities: generalized laws of reflection 
and refraction. Science 334, 333-337 (2011). 

[19] Yu, N. & Capasso, F. Flat optics with designer metasurfaces. Nat. Mater. 13, 139-150 
(2014). 

[20] Grbic, A. & Eleftheriades G.V. Overcoming the diffraction limit with a planar left-
handed transmission-line lens. Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 117403 (2004). 

[21] Ziolkowski, R. W., Jin, P. & Lin, C.-C. Metamaterial-inspired engineering of antennas. 
Proc. IEEE 99, 1720, (2011). 

[22] Binion, J. D. et al. A metamaterial-enabled design enhancing decades-old short backfire 
antenna technology for space applications. Nat. Commun. 10, 1-7 (2019). 

29 

 
 
 
[23] Lier, E. et al. An octave-bandwidth negligible-loss radiofrequency metamaterial. Nat. 
Mater. 10, 216-222 (2011). 

[24] Sussman-Fort, S. E. & Rudish, R. M. Non-Foster impedance matching of electrically-
small antennas. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 57, 2230-2241 (2009). 

[25] Lerosey, G., de Rosny, J., Tourin, A. & Fink, M. Focusing beyond the diffraction limit 
with far-field time reversal. Science 315, 1120-1122 (2007). 

[26] Grbic, A. Jiang, L.  & Merlin, R. Near-field plates: Subdiffraction focusing with 
patterned surfaces. Science 320, 511-513 (2008). 

[27] Wu, Q. & Zhang, R. Towards smart and reconfigurable environment: Intelligent 
reflecting surface aided wireless network. IEEE Commun. Mag. 58, 106-112 (2019). 

[28] Dunna, M., Zhang, C., Sievenpiper, D. & Bharadia, D. ScatterMIMO: Enabling virtual 
MIMO with smart surfaces. Proc. 26th Annu. Int. Conf. Mob. Comput. Netw. 1-14 (2020). 

[29] Chen, L. et al. Pushing the physical limits of iot devices with programmable 
metasurfaces. 18th USENIX Symp. Networked Sys. Des. Implement. 425–438 (2021). 

[30] Zhang, L. et al. A wireless communication scheme based on space-and frequency-
division multiplexing using digital metasurfaces. Nat. Electron. 4, 218-227 (2021). 

[31] Pfeiffer, C. & Grbic, A. Metamaterial Huygens’ surfaces: tailoring wave fronts with 
reflectionless sheets. Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 197401 (2013). 

[32] Shen, Y. et al. Optical vortices 30 years on: OAM manipulation from topological charge 
to multiple singularities. Light Sci. Appl. 8, 1-29 (2019). 

[33] Ren, H. et al. Complex-amplitude metasurface-based orbital angular momentum 
holography in momentum space. Nat. Nanotechnol. 15, 948-955 (2020). 

[34] Olk A. E., Macchi, P. E., & Powell, D. A. High-efficiency refracting millimeter-wave 
metasurfaces. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 68,5453-5462 (2020). 

[35] Tsiftsis, T. A., Valagiannopoulos, C., Liu, H., Boulogeorgos, A. A. A., & Miridakis, N. I. 
Metasurface-coated devices: A new paradigm for energy-efficient and secure 6G 
communications. IEEE Veh. Technol. Mag. 17, 27-36 (2022). 

[36] Lapine, M., Shadrivov, I. V. & Kivshar, Y. S. Colloquium: Nonlinear metamaterials. 
Rev. Mod. Phys. 86, 1093 (2014). 

[37] Zharov, A. A., Shadrivov, I. V. & Kivshar, Y. S. Nonlinear properties of left-handed 
metamaterials. Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 037401 (2003). 

[38] Shadrivov, I. V., Morrison, S. K. & Kivshar, Y. S. Tunable split-ring resonators for 
nonlinear negative-index metamaterials. Opt. Express 14, 9344-9349 (2006). 

30 

 
 
 
[39] Renzo, M. D. et al. Smart radio environments empowered by reconfigurable intelligent 
surfaces: How it works, state of research, and the road ahead. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 38, 
2450-2525 (2020). 

[40] Barbuto, M. et al. Metasurfaces 3.0: A new paradigm for enabling smart electromagnetic 
environments. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. (2021). 

[41] Barbuto, M. et al. Intelligence enabled by 2d metastructures in antennas and wireless 
propagation systems. IEEE Open J. Antennas Propag. 3, 135 (2022). 

[42] Wakatsuchi, H., Kim, S., Rushton, J. J. & Sievenpiper, D. F. Waveform-dependent 
absorbing metasurfaces. Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 245501 (2013). 

[43] Wakatsuchi, H. et al. Waveform selectivity at the same frequency. Sci. Rep. 5, 1-6 
(2015). 

[44] Wakatsuchi, H., Long, J. & Sievenpiper, D. F. Waveform selective surfaces. Adv. Funct. 
Mater. 29, 1806386 (2019). 

[45] Vellucci, S. et al. Waveform-selective mantle cloaks for intelligent antennas. IEEE 
Trans. Antennas Propag. 68, 1717 (2020). 

[46] Imani, M. F. & Smith, D. R. Temporal microwave ghost imaging using a reconfigurable 
disordered cavity. Appl. Phys. Lett.  116, 054102 (2020). 

[47] Eleftheriades, G. V. Protecting the weak from the strong. Nature 505, 490-491 (2014).  

[48] Barbuto, M. et al., Waveguide components and aperture antennas with frequency-and 
time-domain selectivity properties. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 68, 7196-7201 (2020). 

[49] Asano, K., Nakasha, T. & Wakatsuchi, H. Simplified equivalent circuit approach for 
designing time-domain responses of waveform-selective metasurfaces. Appl. Phys. Lett. 116, 
171603 (2020). 

[50] Fong, B. H. et al. Scalar and tensor holographic artificial impedance surfaces. IEEE 
Trans. Antennas Propag. 58, 3212-3221 (2010). 

[51] Quarfoth, R. & Sievenpiper, D. Artificial tensor impedance surface waveguides. IEEE 
Trans. Antennas Propag. 61, 3597-3606 (2013). 

[52] Lee, J. & Sievenpiper, D. F. Method for extracting the effective tensor surface impedance 
function from nonuniform, anisotropic, conductive patterns. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 
67, 3171-3177 (2019). 

[53] Bosiljevac, M. Non-uniform metasurface Luneburg lens antenna design. IEEE Trans. 
Antennas Propag. 60, 4065-4073 (2012). 

[54] Minatti, G. et al.Synthesis of modulated-metasurface antennas with amplitude, phase, 
and polarization control. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 64, 3907-3919 (2016). 

31 

 
 
 
[55] Christopoulos, C. The Transmission-Line Modeling Method (IEEE Press, New Jersey, 
1995). 

[56] Nakasha, T., Phang, S. & Wakatsuchi, H. Pseudo-waveform‐selective metasurfaces and 
their limited performance. Adv. Theory Simul. 4, 2000187 (2021). 

[57] Munk, B. A. Frequency Selective Surfaces: Theory and Design (John Wiley & Sons, 
2005). 

[58] Caloz, C. et al. Electromagnetic nonreciprocity. Phys. Rev. Appl. 10, 047001 (2018). 

[59] Wakatsuchi, H. Time-domain filtering of metasurfaces. Sci. Rep. 5, 16737 (2015). 

[60] Lloyd, S. M., Babiker, M., Thirunavukkarasu, G. & Yuan, J. Electron vortices: Beams 
with orbital angular momentum. Rev. Mod. Phys. 89, 035004 (2017).  

[61] Wakatsuchi, H., Anzai, D., & Smartt C. Visualization of field distributions of waveform-
selective metasurface. IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 15, 690-693 (2015). 

Acknowledgements 

This  work  was  supported  in  part  by  the  Japanese  Ministry  of  Internal  Affairs  and 
Communications (MIC) under the Strategic Information and Communications R&D Promotion 
Program (SCOPE) No. 192106007, the Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST) under the 
Precursory Research for  Embryonic Science and  Technology (PRESTO) No. JPMJPR193A, 
and Japan Society for the Promotion of Science  (JSPS) KAKENHI No. 17KK0114 and No. 
21H01324.  FB,  AT  and  SV  acknowledge  the  support  of  the  research  contract  MANTLES 
funded by the Italian Ministry of University and Research, PRIN 2017 No. 2017BHFZKH.  

Author contributions 

H.W. conceived of the idea and designed the project. D.U., R.H. and K.T. primarily 
performed simulations and measurements under the support of A.A.F., S.M., H.T., H.H., 
M.R.A., S.V., J.L. and H.W. All authors contributed to analyzing the results and editing the 
paper. 

Competing interests 

The authors declare no competing interests. 

32 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a

c

e

f

Rx

Tx

Tx

Transmission line
varied by
pulse width

Z0

ZR

Z1

b

C-based

L-based

Parallel

Reflection

50-ns pulse

Rx

d

0

)

-5

B
d
(
e
d
u
t
i
n
g
a
-15M

-10

Tx

Rx

-20

0

1

2

4
Frequency (GHz)

3

-10

-20

-30

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a

t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

CW
Pulse

-10

-20

-30

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a

t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

CW
Pulse

-10

-20

-30

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a

t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

C

RC

L

RL

CP

RCP

LP

RLP

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

m
u
r
t
c
e
p
s

d
e
z

i
l

a
m
r
o
N

5

CW
Pulse

C-based

-40

2.2

2.4
Frequency (GHz)

2.6

L-based

-40

2.2

2.4
Frequency (GHz)

2.6

Parallel

-40

2.2

Measured

Simulated

-10

-20

-30

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a

t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r

-40T

-10

-20

-30

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a

t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r

-40T

C-based
L-based
Parallel

0.01

0.1

1
Time (µs)

10

0.01

0.1

1
Time (µs)

C-based
L-based
Parallel

10

g

-10

-15

-20

-25

-30

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a

t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

-35

0.1

2.4
Frequency (GHz)

2.6

1 µF
100 µF

100

1000

1

10
Time (ms)

Fig. 1: Fundamental Single-Line System. (a) Simulation model and measurement sample. 
Ordinary grounded monopole transmitters (Tx) and receivers (Rx) were connected by 
waveform-selective metasurface lines to vary surface wave propagation and exhibit ultra-
transient responses at the same frequency. (b) Circuit configurations for C-based, L-based and 
parallel waveform-selective metasurfaces. Design parameters are seen in Figure S1, Table S1 
and Table S2. (c) Simplified equivalent circuit concept representing the two monopole 
antennas (Tx and Rx) connected by the waveform-selective metasurface line. (d) Simulated 
reflectance of the monopoles and normalized spectrum of a 50-ns sine wave pulse of 2.42 
GHz. (e) Simulated transmittances between the antennas connected by (left) C-based, (centre) 
L-based, and (right) parallel-type waveform-selective metasurface lines as a function of 

33 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
frequency with a 10 dBm input power. In the legend, CW represents continuous wave as 
sufficiently long pulse, while Pulse indicates 50-ns-long short pulse (see Figure S6 for a 
comparison to an intermediate pulse of 300 ns). (f) The corresponding transient transmittances 
at 2.4 GHz in the (left) simulation and (right) measurement (also see Figure S6 for simulated 
transmittances with variation of pulse-width). (g) Measured results using larger capacitances 
for the C-based waveform-selective metasurface line. C was increased from 1 nF to 1 μF and 
100 μF. 

34 

 
 
 
 
 
a

b

Rx1

ZR

Z0

ZP

ZC

ZL

Z3

Rx3

Z2

Z1

Rx2

Rx1

Tx

c

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a

t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

-10

-20

-30

-40

Simulated

Measured

d
Rx1

0.01

0.1

1

Rx1
Rx2
Rx3

0.01

10
Time (µs)

Rx1
Rx2
Rx3

0.1

1

10

Rx3

C-based

L-based

Rx3

Tx

Rx2

Parallel

Rx1

Tx

Rx2

Rx3

C-based

Tx

Parallel

L-based

Rx2

e

-25

-30

-35

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a

t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

-40

0.01

Rx1
Rx2
Rx3

0.1
Time (µs)

1

10

Fig. 2: Combined selective multi-line systems and associated performance. (a) Extended 
equivalent circuit concept using additional waveform-selective metasurface lines to 
selectively transmit signals. Three variable transmission lines ZC, ZL, and ZP represented C-
based, L-based and parallel waveform-selective metasurface lines, while Z1, Z2, and Z3 were 
impedances of three receivers Rx1, Rx2 and Rx3. (b) Monopole transmitter connected by all 
three types of waveform-selective metasurface lines. (c) (left) Simulated and (right) measured 
transmittances to Rx1, Rx2 and Rx3. The frequency was set to 2.36 GHz and 2.45 GHz in the 
simulation and measurement, respectively, while the input power was fixed at 15 dBm in both 
cases. (d) Image of a prototype with three waveform-selective metasurfaces fully extended on 
a 2D surface to vary radiation characteristics over the entire surface. (e) Corresponding 
measured transmittances at 2.24 GHz with 23 dBm. Note that the 2D metasurface case had a 
lower operating frequency due to a higher number of electronic circuits soldered to hexagonal 
patch sides, which introduced more parasitic elements. 

35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a

b

Tx (including metasurface panels)

Z1

ZL

Z0

ZP

ZC

Z3

Z2

y

x

z

y
x

Rx1

Rx3

Rx1

Rx2

Rx3

C-based

Tx

Parallel

c

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a
t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

-20

-25

-30

-35

-40

-45

Rx1
Rx2
Rx3

L-based

Rx2

0.001

0.01

0.1

1

10

Time (µs)

d

Rx1

Rx3

Rx2

g

f

y

x

Rx

Far-field 
distance

Φ

Tx

Φ = 60o

e

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a
t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

-20

-25

-30

-35

-40

-45

Rx1
Rx2
Rx3

0.001

0.01

0.1

1

10

Time (µs)

0

2

Φ

(degree)

o
t

d
e
r
a
p
m
o
c

e
c
n
a

t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

)

B
d
(

n
o
i
t
i
d
n
o
c

e
v
i
t
c
e
r
i
d

l

a
e
d

i

Fig. 3: System for free-space wave control. (a) Simplified equivalent circuit concept. A 
transmitter was expressed by an AC source, a switch and input impedance Z0. C-based, L-
based and parallel waveform-selective metasurfaces were respectively represented by variable 
shunt impedances ZC, ZL and ZP between transmission lines that correspond to free space or 
vacuum. Z1, Z2 and Z3 were impedances of three receivers. (b) Simulation model. A grounded 

36 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
monopole transmitter (effectively working as a dipole suspended in free space) was 
surrounded by six panels, comprising two C-based, two L-based and two parallel-type 
waveform-selective transmitting metasurfaces (or slit structures introduced in Figure S13 and 
Figure S14). The distance between the transmitter (Tx) and the receivers (Rx1-Rx3) was 200 
mm. (c) Simulated transmittance at 3.85 GHz with 30 dBm (see Figure S16 for frequency-
domain profiles). (d) Experimental sample designed based on the simulation model above. (e) 
Experimental measurement results at 3.85 GHz with 30 dBm. (f) Schematic for measurement 
of the antenna radiation pattern where the metasurface hexagonal prism was rotated counter 
clock-wise forming an angle ϕ to the Tx-Rx line. In the current schematic ϕ = 60º. Also, in 
this schematic, the C-based, L-based and parallel waveform-selective metasurface panels 
were represented by the same colours as the ones used in (b). (g) Time-varying radiation 
patterns of the metasurface antenna in (left) polar coordinate system and (right) Cartesian 
coordinate system, where the right axis represents comparison to ideal directive condition. 
Detailed information on the ideal directive condition is presented in Figure S17. 

37 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Copper plate

a

c

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a
t
c
e
l
f
e
r
n

i

e
s
a
e
r
c
n
I

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

-0.2

b

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a
t
c
e
l
f
e
r
n

i

e
s
a
e
r
c
n
I

d

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a
t
c
e
l
f
e
r
n

i

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

-0.2

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

-0.2

Front of L-based
Front of parallel
Front of C-based

0.1

1
Time (µs)

10

1.0 cm to L-based, 
1.0 cm to parallel

9.4 cm to L-based, 
1.0 cm to parallel

0.1

1
Time (µs)

10

Front of L-based, parallel
Front of L-based, C-based
Front of parallel, C-based

e
s
a
e
r
c
n
I

0.1

1
Time (µs)

10

Fig. 4: Passive variable sensor to detect location of scattering objects. (a) Antenna system 
used in Fig. 3 in close proximity to a copper plate (70 mm wide and 51 mm tall). The distance 
between the copper plate and the closest waveform-selective metasurface panels was set to 
1.0 cm as a default value. The frequency and power were 3.85 GHz and 30 dBm, respectively. 
(b) Measurement results when the copper plate was deployed in front of either the C-based, L-
based or parallel waveform-selective metasurface panels. Additional measurement results 
using two copper plates with (c) the same distances and (d) different distances. In (d) the 
distance between one of the copper plates and the L-based waveform-selective metasurface 
was set to either 1.0 cm or 9.4 cm, while the distance between another plate and the parallel 
waveform-selective metasurface was fixed at 1.0 cm.  

38 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a

c

)

V

(
e
g
a

t
l

o
V

4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4

d

Tx1

b

-10

-20

-30

-40

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a

t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

-50

0.001 0.01

One Tx

Tx1
Tx2
Tx3

0.1

1

10

Time (µs)

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a

t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

-10

-20

-30

-40

-50

-60

(
e
g
a

t
l

o
V

4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4

Near 450 ns

)

V

(
e
g
a

t
l

o
V

Tx1
Tx2
Tx3
Tx1, 2, 3

450.0

450.5

451.0

4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4

More than one Tx

Tx1, 2
Tx1, 3
Tx2, 3
Tx1, 2, 3

0.001 0.01

0.1

1

10

Time (µs)

Near 10 µs

Tx1
Tx2
Tx3
Tx1, 2, 3

9999.0

9999.5

10000.0

Time (ns)

Time (ns)

One Tx

Tx1
Tx2
Tx3

0.1

1

10

Time (µs)

-10

-20

-30

-40

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a
t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

-50

0.001 0.01

More than one Tx

Tx1, 2
Tx1, 3
Tx2, 3
Tx1, 2, 3

0.1

1

10

Time (µs)

Near 50 ns

)

V

50.0

50.5

Time (ns)

Tx1
Tx2
Tx3
Tx1, 2, 3

51.0

e

Tx3

-10

-20

-30

-40

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a
t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

Tx2

-50

0.001 0.01

f

)

V

(
e
g
a
t
l
o
V

2

1

0

-1

-2

Near 50 ns

50.0

50.5

Time (ns)

)

V

(
e
g
a
t
l
o
V

2

1

0

-1

-2

Tx1
Tx2
Tx3
Tx1, 2, 3

51.0

Near 1 µs

Tx1
Tx2
Tx3
Tx1, 2, 3

1000.0

1000.5

1001.0

)

V

(
e
g
a
t
l
o
V

2

1

0

-1

-2

Near 10 µs

Tx1
Tx2
Tx3
Tx1, 2, 3

9999.0

9999.5

10000.0

Time (ns)

Time (ns)

Fig. 5: Selective reception under simultaneous incidences. (a) Simulation model using three 
external monopoles as transmitters. The centre monopole selectively received different signals 
due to the presence of different waveform-selective transmitting metasurfaces. Frequency and 
input power were 3.85 GHz and 30 dBm, respectively. (b) Transmittances using (left) only 
one external transmitter and (right) more than one external transmitter. (c) Received voltages 
in different time slots. (d) Experimental sample and corresponding (e) transmittances and (f) 
received voltages with input power adjusted to 36 dBm. The distance between the transmitters 
(Tx1-Tx3) and the receiver (Rx) was 70 mm. Additional simulation results are shown in 
Figure S23, where the distance between the transmitters and the receiver was increased to 200 
mm to represent a more realistic far-field distance.  

39 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a

d

Antenna 1

L-based

Antenna 3

From antenna 1

From antenna 2

From antenna 3

To antenna 2
To antenna 3

To antenna 1
To antenna 3

To antenna 1
To antenna 2

b

-10

-20

-30

-40

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a
t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

0.01

0.1

1

10

0.01

0.1

1

10 0.01

0.1

1

10

Time (µs)

To antenna 1

To antenna 2

To antenna 3

From antenna 1
From antenna 3
From both

From antenna 1
From antenna 2
From both

From antenna 2
From antenna 3
From both

0.01

0.1

1

10

0.01

0.1

1

10 0.01

0.1

1

10

Time (µs)

Antenna 1

L-based

Antenna 3

e

-20

-30

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a

t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

-40

0.01

From antenna 1

From antenna 2

From antenna 3

To antenna 2
To antenna 3

To antenna 1
To antenna 3

To antenna 1
To antenna 2

0.1

1

10

0.01

0.1

1

10 0.01

0.1

1

10

Time (µs)

To antenna 1

To antenna 2

To antenna 3

From antenna 2
From antenna 3
From both

From antenna 1
From antenna 3
From both

From antenna 1
From antenna 2
From both

0.1

1

10

0.01

0.1

1

10 0.01

0.1

1

10

Time (µs)

Antenna 2

c

-10

-20

-30

-40

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a
t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

Antenna 2

f

-20

-30

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a

t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

-40

0.01

Fig. 6: Mutually pulse-width-selective communication system. (a) Simulation model using 
three antennas connected by either C-based, L-based or parallel waveform-selective 
metasurface line. The frequency and input power were set to 2.36 GHz and 10 dBm, 
respectively. (b) Simulation results of transmittances from (left) antenna 1, (centre) antenna 2 
and (right) antenna 3. (c) Simulation results of transmittances to (left) antenna 1, (centre) 
antenna 2 and (right) antenna 3. (d) Measurement sample. The frequency and input power 
were set to 2.38 GHz and 15 dBm, respectively. (e) Measurement results of transmittances 
from (left) antenna 1, (centre) antenna 2 and (right) antenna 3. (f) Measurement results of 
transmittances to (left) antenna 1, (centre) antenna 2 and (right) antenna 3. 

40 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Supplementary Information 

Pulse-Driven Self-Reconfigurable Meta-Antennas 

Daiju Ushikoshi, Riku Higashiura, Kaito Tachi, Ashif Aminulloh Fathnan, Suhair Mahmood, 
Hiroki Takeshita, Haruki Homma, Muhammad Rizwan Akram, Stefano Vellucci, Jiyeon Lee, 
Alessandro Toscano, Filiberto Bilotti, Christos Christopoulos and Hiroki Wakatsuchi 

(a)

e

g

(b)

d

Copper

Lumped port

l

Lumped port

phpw

Figure S1: Design of the waveform-selective metasurface line and monopoles used in Fig. 1. 
Their design parameters are given in Table S1. Additionally, the circuit values of Fig. 1b are 
shown in Table S2. The substrate was Rogers3010 (1.27 mm thick). 

Table S1: Design parameters of the waveform-selective metasurface model shown in Figure 
S1. 

Parameter 

Length [mm] 

e 

g 

l 

d 

ph 

pw 

12 

1 

30 

1 

1 

1 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S2: Circuit parameters of the waveform-selective metasurface model used in Fig. 1a to 
Fig. 1f. 

Parameter 

C 

RC 

L 

RL 

CP 

RCP 

LP 

RLP 

Value 
(self-resonant frequency) 
1 nF (200 MHz) 

100 kΩ 

100 μH (10 MHz) 

5.5 Ω 

100 pH (750 MHz) 

100 kΩ 

1 mH (2.4 MHz) 

24 Ω 

(a)

Vin

(b)

(c)

Rd

V

Rd

V

Rd

V

LP

RLP

Vin

RCP

Vin

CP

LP

RLP

RCP

CP

(d)

)

V

(
e
g
a

t
l

o
V

Only C-Based
Only L-Based
Parallel
Analytical

Time (µs)

Figure S2: Schematics of DC circuit simulations where transient solver was used for (a) L-
based, (b) C-based and (c) parallel type circuits. Here the equivalent diode resistance was 
represented by Rd and set to Rd = 680 Ω. The input voltage Vin was 3V. Transient circuit 
components were identical to those used in the parallel waveform-selective metasurface 
presented in Table S4, i.e., LP = 1 mH, RLP = 24 Ω, CP = 100 pF, and RCP = 100 kΩ. (d) 
Simulated voltages over time for the C-based, L-based and parallel circuits using the 
aforementioned circuit parameters. The dashed line is the analytical result obtained from Eq. 
10 of Ref [49].  

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lumped port terminal

RC

C

EM model

Voltage meter

V

Transmitter port

A

Current meter

V

A

Wave port terminal

Receiver port

Figure S3: Schematic representing the co-simulation method in Fig. 1. An EM model was 
used in a circuit simulator and connected to lumped components and a signal source. 
Transmitter and receiver ports were used as the Tx and Rx. RCs and Cs were used for the C-
based waveform-selective metasurface line, while other components were alternatively used 
for the L-based and parallel waveform-selective metasurface lines. More detail is provided 
under “Simulation Method” in the Methods Section. 

(a)

SG/AWG

Amp

Tx

(b)

OSC

VNA

Port 1

Port 2

Rx

Tx

Rx

Isolator

SUT

SUT

Figure S4: Setups for measuring (a) time-domain characteristics and (b) frequency-domain 
characteristics of Fig. 1 and Figure S8. 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure S5: Simulation results of Fig. 1e with various power levels. Transmittances with (a, b) 
C-based, (c, d) L-based and (e, f) parallel waveform-selective metasurface lines. The top 
panels show the transmittances for 50-ns short pulses, while the bottom panels represent those 
for CWs. These results show that almost identical transmittances were obtained with low-
power signals (e.g., -5 dBm) despite the differences in the input waveforms and the 
waveform-selective metasurfaces. This was because the power intensity was not large enough 
to turn on the diodes used. However, the transmittances differed from each other with 
sufficiently large power (e.g., 10 dBm). 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)

(b)

C-based

(c)

L-based

Parallel

(d)

2.4 GHz

C-based
L-based
Parallel

Pulse width

Figure S6: Simulation results of Fig. 1e with variation in pulse width. Comparison of 
transmittance over frequency using CWs, 50-ns pulses and 300-ns pulses for (a) C-based, (b) 
L-based and (c) parallel waveform-selective metasurfaces. (d) Transmittance with respect to 
pulse width variation (50 ns, 100 ns, 300 ns, 1 µs and 10 µs) at 2.4 GHz for C-based, L-based 
and parallel waveform-selective metasurfaces. 

C-based
L-based
Parallel

Time (µs)

Figure S7: Simulation result of the left panel of Fig. 1f with -5 dBm. The signal generated 
from Tx took less than 100 ns to reach Rx for all three cases. Additionally, the three 
transmittances became constant and identical to each other. 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)

(b)

(c)

C-based

L-based

Parallel

CW
Pulse

CW
Pulse

CW
Pulse

Figure S8: Measurement results of Fig. 1f in the frequency domain with 10 dBm. The results 
using (a) the C-based, (b) L-based and (c) parallel waveform-selective metasurface. In (a) 
transmittance for a CW was relatively larger than that for a 50-ns short pulse near 2.4 GHz 
due to the transient absorbing mechanism of the C-based waveform-selective metasurface. In 
contrast, the L-based waveform-selective metasurface more strongly absorbed a short pulse 
than a CW at the same frequency region, which appeared as a smaller transmittance for the 
CW in (b). Since both types of the circuit configurations were used in (c), the parallel 
waveform-selective metasurface reduced transmittances for a CW and a short pulse near 2.4 
GHz.  

C-based (2.41 GHz)
L-based (2.40 GHz)
Parallel (2.44 GHz)

-10

-20

-30

-40

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a

t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

0.01

0.1

1

10

Time (µs)

Figure S9: Transmittances of the measurement samples shown in the right panel of Fig. 1f 
with more optimized frequencies. The input power was fixed at 10 dBm. Results for other 
input powers and frequencies are seen in Figure S10 and Figure S11.  

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)

-10

-20

-30

-40

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a
t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

C-based, 5 dBm

L-based, 5 dBm

-10

-20

-30

-40

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a
t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

2.40 GHz
2.41 GHz
2.42 GHz
2.43 GHz
2.44 GHz

Parallel, 5 dBm

-10

-20

-30

-40

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a
t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

2.40 GHz
2.41 GHz
2.42 GHz
2.43 GHz
2.44 GHz

2.40 GHz
2.41 GHz
2.42 GHz
2.43 GHz
2.44 GHz

0.01

0.1

1

10

0.01

0.1

1

10

0.01

0.1

1

10

Time (µs)

Time (µs)

Time (µs)

(b)

-10

-20

-30

-40

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a
t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

C-based, 10 dBm

2.40 GHz
2.41 GHz
2.42 GHz
2.43 GHz
2.44 GHz

-10

-20

-30

-40

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a
t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

L-based, 10 dBm

2.40 GHz
2.41 GHz
2.42 GHz
2.43 GHz
2.44 GHz

Parallel, 10 dBm

-10

-20

-30

-40

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a
t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

2.40 GHz
2.41 GHz
2.42 GHz
2.43 GHz
2.44 GHz

0.01

0.1

1

10

0.01

0.1

1

10

0.01

0.1

1

10

Time (µs)

Time (µs)

Time (µs)

(c)

-10

-20

-30

-40

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a
t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

C-based, 15 dBm

2.40 GHz
2.41 GHz
2.42 GHz
2.43 GHz
2.44 GHz

-10

-20

-30

-40

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a
t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

L-based, 15 dBm

2.40 GHz
2.41 GHz
2.42 GHz
2.43 GHz
2.44 GHz

Parallel, 15 dBm

-10

-20

-30

-40

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a
t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

2.40 GHz
2.41 GHz
2.42 GHz
2.43 GHz
2.44 GHz

0.01

0.1

1

10

0.01

0.1

1

10

0.01

0.1

1

10

Time (µs)

Time (µs)

Time (µs)

Figure S10: Transmittances of the measurement samples used in the right panel of Fig. 1f 
with different frequencies. The results using (a) 5 dBm, (b) 10 dBm and (c) 15 dBm. From the 
left panels to the right panels, the results correspond to the transmittances of the C-based, L-
based and parallel waveform-selective metasurfaces, respectively. These results indicate that 
the transmittances tended to most effectively vary when the input power was set to 10 dBm or 
15 dBm. At 2.40 GHz and 2.41 GHz, for instance, when the input power was 5 dBm, the 
transmittance of the C-based waveform-selective metasurface was approximately -25 dBm 
near 50 ns and 500 ns (see the black and the red curves of the left panel of (a)). However, by 
increasing the input power to 10 or 15 dBm, the transmittance became lower than -30 dBm. 
Note that near 50 ns and 500 ns, the L-based and the parallel waveform-selective 
metasurfaces increased the transmittances in the centre and the right panels of (a), which 
means that with 10 dBm and 15 dBm the difference between the three structures was 
maximized. In Figure S11, these results are plotted in accordance with frequency and input 
power. 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)

2.40 GHz, 5 dBm

-10

-20

-30

-40

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a
t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

-10

-20

-30

-40

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a
t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

C-based
L-based
Parallel

0.01

0.1

1

10

0.01

(b)

C-based
L-based
Parallel

2.40 GHz, 10 dBm
10

0.1

1

(c)

C-based
L-based
Parallel

-10

-20

-30

-40

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a
t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

2.40 GHz, 15 dBm

0.01

0.1

1

10

Time (µs)

Time (µs)

Time (µs)

-10

-20

-30

-40

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a
t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

2.41 GHz, 5 dBm

-10

-20

-30

-40

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a
t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

C-based
L-based
Parallel

2.41 GHz, 10 dBm

C-based
L-based
Parallel

C-based
L-based
Parallel

2.41 GHz, 
15 dBm

-10

-20

-30

-40

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a
t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

0.01

0.1

1

10

0.01

0.1

1

10

0.01

0.1

1

10

Time (µs)

Time (µs)

Time (µs)

-10

-20

-30

-40

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a

t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

2.42 GHz, 5 dBm

-10

-20

-30

-40

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a

t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

C-based
L-based
Parallel

2.42 GHz, 10 dBm

C-based
L-based
Parallel

-10

-20

-30

-40

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a

t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

2.42 GHz, 15 dBm

C-based
L-based
Parallel

0.01

0.1

1

10

0.01

0.1

1

10

0.01

0.1

1

10

Time (µs)

Time (µs)

Time (µs)

-10

-20

-30

-40

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a

t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

2.43 GHz, 5 dBm

-10

-20

-30

-40

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a

t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

C-based
L-based
Parallel

2.43 GHz, 10 dBm

C-based
L-based
Parallel

-10

-20

-30

-40

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a

t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

C-based
L-based
Parallel

2.43 GHz, 15 dBm

0.01

0.1

1

10

0.01

0.1

1

10

0.01

0.1

1

10

Time (µs)

Time (µs)

Time (µs)

-10

-20

-30

-40

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a
t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

2.44 GHz, 5 dBm

-10

-20

-30

-40

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a
t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

C-based
L-based
Parallel

C-based
L-based
Parallel

2.44 GHz, 
10 dBm

C-based
L-based
Parallel

2.44 GHz, 
15 dBm

-10

-20

-30

-40

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a
t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

0.01

0.1

1

10

0.01

0.1

1

10

0.01

0.1

1

10

Time (µs)

Time (µs)

Time (µs)

Figure S11: Transmittances of the measurement samples used in the right panel of Fig. 1f 
with different waveform-selective metasurfaces. The results using (a) 5 dBm, (b) 10 dBm and 
(c) 15 dBm. From the top panels to the bottom panels, the results correspond to the 
transmittances at 2.40, 2.41, 2.42, 2.43 and 2.44 GHz, respectively. In Figure S10, these 
results are plotted in accordance with input power and type of waveform-selective 
metasurface. 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)

(b)

10 µH
100 µH
1 mH

Figure S12: Simulated transmittances of (a) the C-based and (b) the L-based waveform-
selective metasurface lines used in the left panel of Fig. 1f with various circuit values. By 
increasing C and L, the transient responses were shifted to a large time range. 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
H

E

hs

ws

wp

L

RL

(a)

H

E

k

(b)

Metallic sheet

Lumped port

Dielectric substrate

p

p

(c)

(d)

C

RC

(e)

CP
RCP

LP RLP

Figure S13: Single unit cell of the waveform-selective transmitting metasurface (slit structure) 
used for Fig. 3. (a) Periodic unit cell. Periodic boundaries were applied to the incident E and 
H planes. (b) The front surface of the periodic unit cell. (c, d and e) Circuit configurations of 
C-based, L-based and parallel waveform-selective transmitting metasurfaces. The design 
parameters are shown in Table S3 and Table S4. The substrate was Rogers3010 (1.27 mm 
thick). 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S3: Design parameters of the waveform-selective metasurface model used in Figure 
S13b.  

Parameter 

Length [mm] 

p 

ws 

hs 

wp 

17 

15 

5 

5 

Table S4: Circuit parameters of the waveform-selective metasurface model used in Figure 
S13c to Figure S13e. 

Parameter 

C 

RC 

L 

RL 

CP 

RCP 

LP 

RLP 

Value 
(self-resonant frequency) 
1 nF (200 MHz) 

10 kΩ 

100 μH (10 MHz) 

5.5 Ω 

100 pF (750 MHz) 

100 kΩ 

1 mH (2.4 MHz) 

24 Ω 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)

(b)

C-based
CW
Pulse

L-based
CW
Pulse

(c)

Parallel
CW
Pulse

(d)

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a
t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

C-based
L-based
Parallel

Time (µs)

Figure S14: Simulated transmittances of the (a) C-based, (b) L-based and (c) parallel 
waveform-selective transmitting metasurfaces in Figure S13. The C-based waveform-
selective metasurface more strongly transmitted CWs at approximately 4.0 GHz than short 
pulses, as the structure permitted induced electric charges to enter the diode bridge during an 
initial time period, which lowered the intensity of the intrinsic transmitting resonant 
mechanism of the slit structure. In contrast, the L-based waveform-selective metasurface 
showed more enhanced transmittance for short pulses than that for CWs. This was because at 
a steady state, the electromotive force of the inductor almost disappeared, which shortened the 
gap in the slit and weakened the intrinsic resonant mechanism of the structure. In the case of 
the parallel waveform-selective metasurface, both types of waveforms were poorly 
transmitted due to the presence of both types of circuit configurations. (d) Transient 
transmittances at 3.85 GHz. The incident power was set to 10 dBm. Due to the three different 
transient characteristics, the transmittances were maximized in different time slots. 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)

Rx1

GND

(b)

wm

hs

wp

ws

lt

lc

PEC

Rx3

Rx2

(c)

Metallic sheet

da

Copper

la

hm

gc

gs

Lumped port

ha

Lumped port

Dielectric substrate

wa

Figure S15: Antenna simulation model used for Fig. 3. Dimensions and circuit values are 
given in Table S5 and Table S6. The substrate was Rogers3010 (1.27 mm thick). Rx1, Rx2 
and Rx3 were respectively placed in front of L-based, parallel and C-based waveform-
selective metasurface panels. 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S5: Design parameters of the waveform-selective metasurface model used in Figure 
S15 (i.e., in Fig. 3). 

Parameter 

Length [mm] 

wm 

hm 

ws 

hs 

wp 

lt 

lc 

gc 

gs 

la 

da 

wa 

ha 

35 

51 

15 

5 

5 

6 

12 

2 

1.5 

18 

1 

1 

1 

Table S6: Circuit parameters of the waveform-selective metasurface model used in Figure 
S15 (i.e., in Fig. 3). 

Parameter 

C 

RC 

L 

RL 

CP 

RCP 

LP 

RLP 

Value 
(self-resonant frequency) 
10 nF (2 GHz) 

100 kΩ 

100 μH (10 MHz) 

5.5 Ω 

1 nF (200 MHz) 

100 kΩ 

1 mH (2.4 MHz) 

24 Ω 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)

(b)

Rx1
Rx2
Rx3

Pulse 
(0 dBm)

Rx1
Rx2
Rx3

CW 
(0 dBm)

(c)

(d)

Rx1
Rx2
Rx3

Pulse
(30 dBm)

Rx1
Rx2
Rx3

CW 
(30 dBm)

Figure S16: Simulated frequency dependence of the antenna shown in Fig. 3, composed of 3 
different types of waveform-selective metasurfaces. (a) 0-dBm short pulses. (b) 0-dBm CWs. 
(c) 30-dBm short pulses. (d) 30-dBm CWs. As shown in (a) and (b), there was almost no 
difference between the transmittances for short pulses and those for CWs because the diodes 
used were not turned on. In contrast, (c) and (d) showed clear differences. Specifically, the 
transmittance of Rx1 was maintained at a large level for the 30-dBm short pulses between 3.2 
and 4.5 GHz in (c), as the L-based waveform-selective metasurface deployed in front of Rx1 
strongly transmitted the signal generated from the transmitter compared to the C-based and 
parallel waveform-selective metasurfaces. In the case of the 30 dBm CWs, the C-based 
waveform-selective metasurface effectively transmitted signals to Rx3, which appeared as a 
relatively large transmittance in (d). The parallel waveform-selective metasurface poorly 
transmitted both the 30-dBm pulses and the 30-dBm CWs due to the presence of both circuits, 
appearing as limited transmittances in (c) and (d). 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)

t = 9.98 µs

(b)

t = 1 µs

Φ

t = 0.02 µs

(c)

(d)

Φ

Φ

Time-varying (w/ circuit)
Ideal static (w/o circuit)

Time-varying (w/ circuit)
Ideal static (w/o circuit)

Time-varying (w/ circuit)
Ideal static (w/o circuit)

Φ

Φ

Time-varying (w/ circuit)
Ideal static (w/o circuit)

Time-varying (w/ circuit)
Ideal static (w/o circuit)

Time-varying (w/ circuit)
Ideal static (w/o circuit)

Φ

Φ

Figure S17. (a) Measured time-varying transmittance from the metasurface-based antenna 
shown in Fig. 3g with various far-field angles ϕ. Three vertical dashed lines indicate time 
samples where the far-field patterns were presented in Fig. 3g (also presented here in Figure 
S17c). (b) Metasurface sample in ideal directive condition. Slits in two hexagonal sides were 
opened without circuits, while the others were fully closed by copper tapes. No time variation 
was observed in this ideal directive condition (static). (c) Comparison between the ideal and 
realized far-field patterns from the measurement results. In the right axis of the right panel of 
Fig. 3g, the measured far-field patterns were subtracted by the maximum level of the ideal 
directive condition, which gave a difference of around -5 dB. (d) Comparison between the 
ideal and realized far-field patterns from the simulation results. Here, a better agreement was 
obtained between the ideal and realized field power than those obtained in the measurement. 
This was presumably because additional losses introduced during the fabrication process 
reduced the measured transmittance.  

16 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
(a)

Transmittance

(b)

Transmitted Power

(c)

(d)

-30 dB

-20dB

Rx 1
Rx1

Tx

-30 dB
-30dB

-30 dB
-20dB

Rx2

Rx 2

Rx3

Rx 3

-15 dBm

Tx

Rx 1

Rx1

5 dBm

5 dBm

-15 dBm

Rx2

Rx 2

-30 dB
-30dB

-30dB
-30 dB

Rx3

Rx 3

(e)

(f)

Figure  S18:  Characterization  of  crosstalk  between  external  antennas  with  the  proposed 
metasurface. (a) Schematic of interference paths. Rx1 also received secondary reflection from 
both  Rx2  and  Rx3.  The  estimated  power  in  each  path  is  indicated.  (b)  Transmitted  power 
calculated using the transmittance in (a) when the source power was 35 dBm. While the main 
path from Tx to Rx1 gave 5 dBm power, the crosstalk from Rx2 and Rx3 was only -15 dBm. 
(c-d) Transmittance over time for all antennas outside the hexagonal metasurface prism in (c) 
simulation  and  (d)  measurement.  (e-f)  Power  received  through  the  main  path,  i.e.,  corner 
directions of each metasurface panel, compared to the crosstalk both in (e) simulation and (f) 
measurement.  

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rx1
Rx2
Rx3

Figure S19: Simulated transient transmittance of the antenna shown in Fig. 3 and composed of 
3 different types of waveform-selective metasurfaces at 3.85 GHz with 0 dBm. The 
simulation result shows that all the receivers observed the signal in almost the same manner as 
the diodes used were not turned on. This result also indicates that the signal took 
approximately 10 ns to reach the receivers. From 10 ns to 10 µs, the transmittance was fixed 
at a constant value since the transmitter behaved as an ordinary omnidirectional antenna. The 
related frequency-domain profiles are shown in Figure S16. 

(a)

(b)

C-based

L-based

Rx1
Rx2
Rx3

(c)

Rx1
Rx2
Rx3

Parallel

Rx1
Rx2
Rx3

Time (µs)

Time (µs)

Time (µs)

Figure S20: Simulated transient transmittance of the antenna shown in Fig. 3 but composed of 
only one of the three waveform-selective metasurfaces at 3.85 GHz with 30 dBm. The results 
using (a) C-based, (b) L-based and (c) parallel waveform-selective metasurfaces. Compared to 
Figure S18, although all the receivers received the signal in the same manner, the 
transmittance profile was shown to vary in the time domain. 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)

(b)

W/O (reference)
Front of L-based
Front of parallel
Front of C-based

(c)

W/O (reference)
Front of L-based, parallel
Front of L-based, C-based
Front of parallel, C-based

W/O (reference)

1.0 cm to L-based, 
1.0 cm to parallel

9.4 cm to L-based, 
1.0 cm to parallel

Figure S21: Measured reflectances of the passive variable sensor shown in Fig. 4. (a) 
Measurement results using only one copper plate. Measurement results using two copper 
plates with (b) the same distances and (c) different distances. Increases in reflectance of (a), 
(b) and (c) are seen in Fig. 4b, Fig. 4c and Fig. 4d, respectively.  

(b)

(a)

Copper plate

Monopole

W/O metasurfaces

Distance from antenna (cm)

(c)

Distance from metasurfaces (cm)

W/ metasurfaces

Distance from antenna (cm)

Figure S22: Measured reflectances of the passive variable sensor shown in Fig. 4 with various 
distances between the transmitting monopole and copper plate. (a) Image of the measurement 
without waveform-selective metasurface panels. Results (b) without and (c) with waveform-
selective metasurface panels. In (c) the copper plate was positioned in front of the L-based 
waveform-selective metasurface panels. The result of (c) was obtained around 50 ns. These 
results indicate that there appeared a standing wave between the monopole and the copper 
plate, which affects the sensing performance. However, this influence can be mitigated by 
improving the impedance matching of the monopole. Nonetheless, these results show that the 
envelop curves in (b) and (c) gradually decreased by increasing the distance from the 
monopole antenna. Thus, if the impedance matching issue is addressed then the sensing 
performance is expected to be more enhanced to detect the distance from a scattering object.  

19 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)

One Tx

(b)

More than one Tx

Time (µs)

Time (µs)

(c)

Near 50 ns

Near 450 ns

Near 10 μs

Figure S23: Additional simulation results for Fig. 5 with the distance between the transmitters 
and the receiver increased to 200 mm (representing a more realistic far-field distance). The 
input power was increased to 45 dBm to turn on the diodes used. (a) Transmittances with a 
single source. (b) Transmittances with more than one source. (c) Voltages in the time domain. 
Almost the same conclusion was drawn as that of Fig. 5 except minor discrepancies including 
different magnitudes in transmittances. More importantly, however, this figure also 
establishes that waveform-selective reception is achievable even under simultaneous 
incidences and with far-field radiation. 

Figure S24: Measurement setup for the simultaneous incidences in Fig. 5. Tx1, Tx2 and Tx3 
were respectively placed in front of L-based, parallel and C-based waveform-selective 
metasurface panels. A detailed description of the setup is presented under “Measurement 
Method” in the Methods Section. 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)

-20

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a
t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

-25

-30

-35

-40

-45

dashed: w/o 100Ω
solid: with 100Ω

(b)

)

B
d
(
e
c
n
a
t
t
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

Rx1
Rx2
Rx3

0.01

0.1

1

10

Time (µs)

-20

-25

-30

-35

-40

-45

0.01

Rx1
Rx2
Rx3

0.1

1

10

Time (µs)

Figure S25. (a) Simulated transmittance of the metasurface antenna used in Fig. 3. The input 
frequency was set to 3.85 GHz with a 30-dBm power level. An additional resistor of 100 Ω 
was connected to each diode bridge in series (solid), compared to the original simulation 
result without the additional resistance (dashed). The resistance was deliberately added to 
resemble additional losses introduced during the fabrication process. (b) Measured 
transmittance using the same setup (also presented in Fig. 3c). 

(a)

Rx1

Rx3

(b)

Tx

Rx2

R1

Tx

R2

Tx

(c)

(d)

Figure S26: (a) Schematic of the equilateral triangle metasurface antenna simulation. (b) 
Comparison of two triangle metasurfaces having different inscribed radius of R1 = 10.1 mm (~ 
0.13λ) and R2 = 20.1 mm (~ 0.26λ). In both cases the distance between the transmitter (Tx) 
and the receivers (Rx1-Rx3) was 200 mm. Transmittance of the metasurface antenna over 
time for the metasurface with (c) the small triangle shape and (d) the large triangle shape. The 
transmittance was significantly reduced in the small triangle case compared to the large 
triangle case due to the effect of coupling as well as standing wave that were amplified by the 
smaller distance between the monopole antenna and the metasurface panels (equivalent to the 
inscribed radius R). 

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
