Point spread function reconstruction for SOUL+LUCI LBT data

Matteo Simionia,*, Carmelo Arcidiaconoa, Roland Wagnerb, Andrea Graziana, Marco
Gullieuszika, Elisa Portaluric, Benedetta Vulcania, Anita Zanellaa, Guido Agapitod, Richard
Daviese, Tapio Helinf, Fernando Pedichinig, Roberto Piazzesig, Enrico Pinnad, Ronny
Ramlaub,h, Fabio Rossid, Aleksi Salof
aINAF - Osservatorio Astronomico di Padova, Vicolo dell’Osservatorio 5, Padova, Italy, I-35122
bIndustrial Mathematics Institute, Johannes Kepler University Linz, Altenberger Strasse 69, Linz, Austria, 4040
cINAF - Osservatorio Astronomico d’Abruzzo, Via Mentore Maggini, Teramo, Italy, I-64100
dINAF - Osservatorio Astroﬁsico di Arcetri, Via E. Fermi 5, Firenze, Italy, I-50125
eMPE - Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur extraterrestrische Physik Giessenbachstrasse 1, Garching, Germany, D-85748
fLUT University, P.O.Box 20, Lappeenranta, Finland, FI-53851
gINAF - Osservatorio Astronomico di Roma, Via Frascati 33, Monte Porzio Catone, Italy, I-00078
hRICAM - Johann Radon Institute for Computational and Applied Mathematics, Altenberger Strasse 69, Linz,
Austria, 4040

Abstract. This paper presents the status of an ongoing project aimed at developing a PSF reconstruction software for
adaptive optics (AO) observations. In particular, we test for the ﬁrst time the implementation of pyramid wave-front
sensor data on our algorithms. As a ﬁrst step in assessing its reliability, we applied the software to bright, on-axis,
point-like sources using two independent sets of observations, acquired with the single-conjugated AO upgrade for the
Large Binocular Telescope.

Using only telemetry data, we reconstructed the PSF by carefully calibrating the instrument response. The accu-
racy of the results has been ﬁrst evaluated using the classical metric: speciﬁcally, the reconstructed PSFs differ from
the observed ones by less than 2% in Strehl ratio and 4.5% in full-width at half maximum. Moreover, the recovered
encircled energy associated with the PSF core is accurate at 4% level in the worst case. The accuracy of the recon-
structed PSFs has then been evaluated by considering an idealized scientiﬁc test-case consisting in the measurements
of the morphological parameters of a compact galaxy.

In the future, our project will include the analysis of anisoplanatism, low SNR regimes, and the application to

multi-conjugated AO observations.

Keywords: adaptive optics; astronomy; infrared imaging; optical transfer functions; point spread functions.

*Matteo Simioni, matteo.simioni@inaf.it

1 Introduction

Next generation workhorse facilities for 8-10m class ground-based telescopes [e.g., ERIS (En-
hanced Resolution Imager and Spectrograph) and MAVIS (MCAO-Assisted Visible Imager and
Spectrograph) at the Very Large Telescope; SHARK-visible (System for coronagraphy with High
order Adaptive optics from R to K band) and SHARK-near-infrared (NIR) at the Large Binocular
Telescope (LBT); KAPA (Keck All-sky Precision Adaptive-optics) and KPF (Keck Planet Finder)
at the W. M. Keck Observatory] will improve Adaptive Optics (AO) assisted imaging and spec-
troscopy, both in the visible and at NIR wavelengths. The great advances obtained by these AO
systems will pave the road for extremely large telescopes (e.g., the Giant Magellan Telescope, the
European Southern Observatory’s Extremely Large Telescope (ELT) and the Thirty Meter Tele-
scope) in the future to obtain sharper and deeper images than the ones obtained with big space
telescopes (e.g., Hubble Space Telescope and James Webb Space Telescope), exploiting all their
ground-breaking imaging capabilities.

2
2
0
2

p
e
S
4

]

M

I
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
3
6
5
1
0
.
9
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
In many scientiﬁc applications exploiting diffraction limit AO capabilities1–6 , a serious chal-
lenge experienced during data analysis is the precise knowledge of the two-dimensional point
spread function (PSF): approaching the diffraction limit of ground-based cornerstone facilities is
not an easy task. A severe drawback in this sense is that the PSF of an AO system is a very com-
plex entity, which has a high number of degrees of freedom involved, varies spatially in the ﬁeld of
view, is not constant in time, and behaves differently at each wavelength. Accurate knowledge of
the PSF is mandatory to perform high-quality photometric, spectroscopic, and astrometric analysis
of astronomical AO data-sets. For instance, a detailed knowledge of the PSF is an unavoidable in-
gredient to carry out transformational science cases e.g. resolved stellar clusters beyond the Milky
Way, stellar populations beyond the Local Group up to the Virgo cluster, galaxy size evolution,
stellar mass growth across cosmic time, substructures in intermediate-z galaxies, detailed studies
of high-redshift galaxies, and the formation of the smallest galaxies and proto-globular clusters at
high z. In addition, a precise reconstruction of the PSF for astronomical images is fundamental e.g.
for: i) quality control of scientiﬁc frames (especially blank extra-galactic ﬁelds); ii) ﬂux calibra-
tion of spectroscopic data (since the PSF depends on the wavelength); iii) unbiased photometry in
crowded ﬁelds; iv) image restoration (e.g. Richardson-Lucy deconvolution); v) forward modelling.
Currently there is a growing interest in the development of tools to infer the observed PSF from
AO systems. The three main approaches of PSF estimation are 1) based on focal-plane data (e.g.
PSF classiﬁcation, PSF ﬁtting/interpolation, PSF marginal estimation and deconvolution, empirical
PSF derivation); 2) based on pupil-plane data [e.g. PSF simulation, PSF reconstruction (PSF-R)];
3) hybrid techniques that combine the use of point sources in the observed scientiﬁc (co-added)
images, models of atmospheric turbulence, and instrumental aberrations, hence optimizing the re-
construction (e.g. adaptive PSF-R, myopic deconvolution, calibrated PSF-R). All these methods
have been extensively described in Ref. 7. Focal-plane based methods by default include the non
common path aberrations (NCPA) components, which means that imperfections in the optics of the
instruments are automatically included in the reconstruction. But they are also sensitive to the im-
age noise, and they can be considered representative of a speciﬁc positions in the ﬁeld and/or for a
particular wavelength. Moreover, they require the presence of at least one non-saturated point-like
source in the imaged ﬁeld of view. Pupil-plane based methods, instead, refer to techniques aimed
at deriving the post-AO PSF only from telemetry control loop data, e.g. time series of wavefront
sensor (WFS) measurements or applied deformable mirror commands and associated calibration,
without any recourse to focal plane data. NCPA or segment differential piston should be taken into
account separately, following dedicated independent calibrations. Testing the result of pupil-plane
methods can only be carried out via comparison of PSFs in the science data.

PSF-R is a versatile and ﬂexible approach, that can also be the initial step for hybrid or adaptive
methods. The PSF-R technique is the only viable possibility when no other solutions are possible,
due to several reasons: e.g. there are no suitable point sources in the science frames, the target is
faint and complex, as in dense and crowded ﬁelds (i.e. the core of globular clusters, where only the
PSF cores are detected for the majority of the stars), the bright stars are saturated, the integration
times are relatively short, observations have been carried out in poor atmospheric conditions or
faint guide stars have been used. Indeed, for both single conjugated adaptive optics (SCAO8) and
multi conjugated adaptive optics (MCAO9, 10) observing modes, the AO reference star can be out
of the instrumental ﬁeld of view. Moreover, in laser assisted11 MCAO mode, only faint tip-tilt stars
are usually present. PSF-R is particularly useful in spectroscopic mode, where no PSF is available
in the focal plane, or in non-sidereal tracking mode, where the stars in the ﬁeld of view may be

2

blurred along one axis and so cannot be used as a PSF reference, or where the Solar System targets
(used also as AO reference) can be spatially extended.

The PSF-R approach is particularly convenient for the extra-galactic targets where the ﬁeld
of view is typically void of bright point sources, necessary to characterize the PSF of the science
data using other methods. As an example, simulations of stellar densities with TRILEGAL12 code
indicate that, in a typical extra-galactic ﬁeld, one can expect on average ∼ 3 stars per square arcmin
in the range Ks=16-25 Vega mag. Considering the typical ﬁeld of view of AO assisted instruments
(of the order of 1 arcmin2), the statistical probability of having at least one available star is less
than 35% to 45%. The PSF-R remains the unique way forward.

In this paper, we present the ﬁrst results of our ongoing project aimed at obtaining a PSF-R
tool, i.e. the estimation of the PSF using only AO control-loop telemetry, following the seminal
work of Ref. 13. The adopted PSF-R method is described in Ref. 14 and involves several approx-
imations to reconstruct the PSF from the residual phase power spectrum density. Such algorithm
was previously tested on simulated data only. Therefore, the present work is the ﬁrst application
of the method to real telescope data and is meant to validate the approach. For this reason, we
limited the present analysis to high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), on-axis observations to reduce the
degree of freedom of the problem and avoid degeneracies in multi-parameter space (e.g. when
taking into account wider AO reference SNR range, off-axis angles, seeing values). We investi-
gate the performance of the selected software with archival, SCAO data from the Large Binocular
Telescope (LBT15). Speciﬁcally, the data consist of two distinct set of observations of bright, on-
axis point sources, preliminary described in Ref. 16. They both have been taken as part of the
Single conjugated adaptive Optics Upgrade for LBT (SOUL17) validation operations, using LBT
Utility Camera in the Infrared (LUCI18). Moreover, to quantify and compare the level of accuracy
obtained, we present an idealized scientiﬁc case in the area of applicability of the PSF-R, showing
the gain offered by this technique to the analysis of the photometry and morphology of a high-z
galaxy.

The paper is organized as follows: the PSF-R algorithm is described in Section 2; the data are
presented in Section 3; in Section 4 the performance of the PSF-R algorithm is discussed evaluating
also the impact on the measure of the morphological parameters of compact galaxies, and Section
5 is dedicated to the summary and conclusions. Finally, an interesting relation linking the encircled
energy (EE), the full width at half maximum (FWHM), and Strehl ratio (SR) of the observed PSF
is discussed in Appendix A.

2 PSF-R method

In this section, we describe the method used to reconstruct the on-axis PSF from AO telemetry
data, the one described in Ref. 14, which is by itself an update of the classical algorithm developed
by Ref. 13. As detailed in Ref. 14, the algorithm is highly ﬂexible with respect to the WFS, and we
performed minor tuning to adapt it to SOUL+LUCI. Speciﬁcally, to our knowledge this is the ﬁrst
successful implementation of a PSF-R algorithm to a pyramid WFS AO system. This is especially
relevant also in sight of the upcoming next generation AO instruments that will make wide use
of this kind of WFS. The core idea of this approach is to compute the Optical Transfer Function
(OTF), the Fourier transform of the PSF derived from the pupil mask. This is advantageous be-
cause the OTF can subsequently be factorized into several independent components (dependent on

3

wavelength and line-of-sight), which can be either calculated from the wavefront residual phase or
using tabulated values derived from appropriate calibrations.

The OTF can be deﬁned as:

OT FAO+N CP A = OT FAO · KN CP A

(1)

where OT FAO is the post-AO OTF describing the effects of the AO corrected atmospheric turbu-
lence and KN CP A is the non-AO ﬁlter describing the effects due to the imperfection of the optical
system.

Following the mathematical analysis of Refs. 13 and 14, OT FAO is described as:

OT FAO = OT Ftel · exp(−

1
2

D)

(2)

where D is the structure function of the residual incoming phase (i.e. a time average of the spatial
correlation14) and thus wavelength dependent, while OT Ftel is the OTF of the telescope computed
from the pupil mask. D is split into two components that are independent as they describe the part
corrected by the AO system, D(cid:107) (lower order structure function), and the part perpendicular to the
AO corrected one, D⊥ (higher order structure function). From these two structure functions, the
associated ﬁlters K(cid:107) and K⊥ can be computed as

with x ∈ {(cid:107), ⊥}. This gives:

Kx = exp(−

1
2

Dx)

OT FAO = OT Ftel · K(cid:107) · K⊥.

(3)

(4)

Therefore, if we are able to measure the D components from telemetry data, we can go back to the
structure function and determine the OTF (and consequently the PSF) of the system.

To compute D(cid:107), one needs the residual phase in the space of the mirror modes. However, we
only have an estimate for it, namely the reconstructed residual phase computed from the WFS
data, which is perturbed by noise and aliasing effects. Therefore, since the assumptions from
Refs. 13 and 14 of fast frame rate and a least squares reconstructor are fulﬁlled, we can use the
same decomposition as in Ref. 13 to decompose D(cid:107) further as

D(cid:107) = DREC − Dn + Dal

(5)

where DREC is the structure function computed from the reconstructed residual incoming phase
φREC,t, Dn is the noise structure function and Dal is the aliasing structure function. It is worth not-
ing that this decomposition is valid independently of the type of WFS. As detailed in Ref. 14, the
adopted method takes as input the reconstructed residual phases φREC,t, which are recovered from
the applied updates of the deformable mirror, to compute DREC. Any WFS-speciﬁc issues have to
be solved already when setting up the AO system control algorithm. In the case of SOUL the opti-
cal gain is measured through a low-amplitude sinusoidal modulation of a controlled mirror mode.
Thus, the SOUL slopes telemetry already include the correction for the optical gain. Therefore,
the used PSF-R algorithm is ﬂexible enough to account for speciﬁc characteristics of the pyramid

4

Table 1 Structure functions computed for the PSF-R. A description on how they are obtained is also provided.

D⊥

Name
Wavefront
order
function

higher
structure

Description
Computed using the corresponding seeing r0 and pupil
mask via a statistical model of the atmospheric turbu-
lence (von Karman, Kolmogorov).

DREC Residual
function

structure

Computed from the reconstructed residual
incoming
phase φREC,t, for time frames t and related to the direc-
tion of the NGS at wavelength λ. The residual incom-
ing phase is in turn obtained directly from the teleme-
try. For the pyramid WFS, it has been computed as
φREC,t = s C g M where s is the WFS measurement,
the so-called slopes of the pyramid WFS; C is the con-
trol matrix; g is the modal control loop gain vector of
the pyramid WFS and M is the description of the mir-
ror modes in terms of phase (a product of the instrument
calibtrations).

Noise
function

structure

Computed from the noise model. The control matrix,
which already incorporate WFS-speciﬁc effects, has been
used to propagate from WFS level to phase level.

Dn

Dal

Aliasing structure
function

A model is used to propagate simulated higher order parts
of the phases through the WFS model and then compute
the response of the AO control algorithm for the corre-
sponding seeing r0, the used AO control algorithm, and
pupil mask. To retrieve a statistical average, this proce-
dure is rerun for many simulated phases before all the
computed aliasing phases are used in the structure func-
tion computation.

Computed from DREC, Dn, and Dal following Eq. 5.

D(cid:107)

Wavefront
order
function

lower
structure

WFS without any major modiﬁcation. We refer the interested reader to a more detailed description
of the various structure functions provided in Table 1.

The last term needed for the computation of the post-AO OT F (OT FAO) is OT Ftel, which
is computed from the calibrated pupil mask and then multiplied by the aforementioned ﬁlters
following Equation (4).

KN CP A in Eq. (1) is computed from the calibrated phase map and depends on the speciﬁc

instrument conﬁguration and telescope pointing. It therefore varies in the ﬁeld.

The ﬁnal PSF is then retrieved by transforming the OT F AO+N CP A via inverse Fourier trans-
form into the P SF REC, which is also integrated in wavelength over the pass-band of the selected
ﬁlter.

We note that focusing only on on-axis point source, the anisoplanatic component can be ne-
glected, thus reducing the degrees of freedom in the PSF-R. Moreover, considering that during

5

the observations described in this work the loop was sampled at frequencies > 500 Hz, and we
expect that non-negligible physical vibrations occur at much slower variations, we can assume that
the SOUL+LUCI system already accounted for all these variations. Therefore we do not need to
account for any additional term related to vibrations, as it is already present in the used data.

3 Data

As the main goal of this work is to apply the selected algorithm for PSF-R to real AO data, we used
SCAO near infrared images and associated synchronous telemetry acquired with the SOUL system
mounted on the LBT and feeding the LUCI near-infrared camera. This, in turn, is equipped with
three optical zoom conﬁgurations delivering the same number of distinct resolutions (see Ref. 19
for a detailed description of the instrument set-up). We use the diffraction limited mode, called
N30, a 2048 × 2048 px conﬁguration with 30” × 30” ﬁeld of view (14.95 mas/px).

Table 2 Log of the SOUL+LUCI@LBT observations

PROG. ID
Target
RA [hh mm ss]
DEC [◦ (cid:48) (cid:48)(cid:48)]
R [mag]
Date [yyyy/mm/dd]
Filter
NDIT×DIT [s]
AIRMASS

DAYTIME
1183150
illuminated ﬁber
N.A.
N.A.
10.0
2019/03/29
H
90 × 1
N.A.

NIGHTTIME
1286078
HD 873
00 13 13.123
+20 45 9.479
8.57
2019/11/09
FeII
20 × 0.313
1.0248

We used archive data, consisting of 2 independent datasets. The ﬁrst set refers to observations
of an artiﬁcial source (i.e. an illuminated ﬁber - hereafter ”daytime” dataset) with controlled atmo-
spheric condition20 . The second dataset consists of observations of a natural point source (i.e. a
bright star - hereafter ”nighttime” dataset). The log of the observations is presented in Table 2.

3.1 Observed PSFs

The LUCI data reduction procedure is identical for both datasets. First, a bad-pixel map is obtained
from the dark frames and a background image is generated averaging the sky frames. Individual
science frames have been stacked with a sigma-clipped mean to increase the ﬁnal SNR; we have
then subtracted the background image from the stacked science one. Finally, we masked the bad
pixels and estimated their values by linear interpolation of the neighboring ones. We corrected the
obtained images for the residual background and cropped them, selecting a region of ∼ 8 arcsec2
(190px × 190px), centered at the point source. Finally, we normalized them to their total ﬂux.
These high SNR images will be referred in the following as “observed PSFs”.

3.2 Reconstructed PSFs

In the following, we provide additional technical details on the application of the adopted PSF-R
method in the speciﬁc case of SOUL+LUCI data. We only used the telemetry data associated with
the scientiﬁc observations to reconstruct the PSFs.

6

Fig 1 NCPA mean residuals, after AO correction, for daytime (left) and nighttime (right). The pixel values are in nm.

The telemetry data provided by the SOUL team include: AO WFS slopes data history, control
matrix, interaction matrix, gain vector, and the pupil deﬁnition. In particular, we obtained pupil
images taken with LUCI in the ”pupil image” mode used for the alignment of the instrument.
This imaging mode unfortunately does not include the additional pupil obstruction exclusive of the
N30 camera. We derived them from the camera mechanical drawing, to obtain the pupil shape for
daytime dataset. For nighttime, additional contributions have been taken into account in deﬁning
the pupil shape.
In this conﬁguration, in fact, LUCI sees also the secondary mirror mounting
(including the LBT swing arm) shadow occurring in the pupil mask. While the N30 camera system
is ﬁxed with the LUCI detector, the swing arm projection depends on the orientation of the LUCI
camera that is continuously updating to follow the apparent rotation of the sky. The derived pupil
shape is used as a binary mask assuming negligible modulation of the amplitude (optical system
transmission) over the aperture. Using the LUCI images we verify the pixelscale value which
results 14.95 mas/px for both the H and FeII ﬁlters.

In all the considered observations, NCPA between WFS optical train and the LUCI cam-
era are compensated by the AO system making the pyramid loop closing on non-zero reference
slopes. This correction, however, leaves residual depending on the pyramid optical gain21 and un-
calibrated reciprocal ﬂexures of the WFS with respect to LUCI. These residuals may count up to
100 nm19 of wavefront error. Lacking proper calibrations, we measured these residuals by ana-
lyzing the observed PSF: this method, applied on long exposure PSF, has low sensitivity. In the
present case we observed residuals (tip-tilt free) accounting for about 40 nm in both daytime and
nighttime. The measured phase maps for NCPA are shown in Figure 1. As a consequence, the
small residual values also indicate that the pyramid WFS gain measures registered in the telemetry
data are accurate. Even if negligible, these estimated wavefront errors were also applied in the
PSF-R algorithm.

7

Fig 2 Daytime PSFs. Left panel: observed PSF. Central panel: reconstructed PSF. Both are in arbitrary logarithmic
color scales. Right panel: normalized residuals between observed and reconstructed PSF. The residuals are normalized
pixel-per-pixel with the observed PSF. The color scale is linear and the colorbar is on the bottom. There are no evident
residual structures of the two PSFs. All the images are ∼ 8 arcsec2 (190px × 190px).

3.3 Diffraction limited PSFs

We numerically computed the monochromatic diffraction limited PSF thanks to the knowledge of
the pupil shape. This was obtained as the square modulus of the Fourier transform of the pupil
mask, which was properly zero-padded to obtain the adequate pixelscale. Finally, different sizes of
the zero-padding were used to take into account the whole passband of the selected LUCI ﬁlters.
For both datasets, the ﬁnal diffraction limited PSFs are composed by 11 monochromatic ones,
calculated at discrete wavelength intervals over each passband.

3.4 Daytime

For this particular dataset, laboratory-like conditions have been used: optical turbulence distur-
bance has been generated and corrected22 using the Adaptive Secondary23 of the LBT, with the
telescope and AO system conﬁgured for daytime20 . Speciﬁcally, a seeing of 1.2 arcsec was
simulated with an average wind speed of 15 m/s19 . The simulated point source has an equiva-
lent R-band magnitude of 10.0 mag. Three sets of 30 1s-images have been obtained in H band
(1.5 − 1.8 µm, centered at 1.65 µm), achieving a temporal frequency for the AO correction of
500 Hz. The resulting saving rate for the associated telemetry is 500 frames/s. In all the science
frames the point source is not saturated, within the linear regime of the detector. The resulting
SNR per pixel for the observed PSF goes from 250 at peak to a mean value of 10 at a radial dis-
tance of 300 mas (20px) from PSF centre and reaching mean SNR per pixel= 1 around 0.9 arcsec
(60px). The observed PSF for daytime is presented in the left panel of Figure 2. The measured SR
- deﬁned as the ratio between the peak values of a selected PSF and of the diffraction limited one -
is 0.59 and the FWHM is 2.95 px. The central panel of Figure 2 shows the reconstructed PSF. The
match between the two PSFs can be qualitatively inferred from the right panel of the same ﬁgure,
where the normalized residuals are presented. No evident residual PSF structures are present. A
quantitative assessment on the performance of the reconstructed PSF is presented in the following
sections.

8

Fig 3 Nighttime PSFs. Left panel. Observed PSF. Central panel. Reconstructed PSF. Right panel. Normalized
residuals between observed and reconstructed PSF. Images size, color codes and scales are the same as in Figure 2.

3.5 Nighttime

The nighttime dataset has been obtained in the narrow-band FeII ﬁlter, centered at 1.65 µm, with
FWHM 0.02 µm. The use of a narrow-band ﬁlter reduces the impact of atmospheric dispersion on
data: LUCI is not equipped with an atmospheric dispersion corrector and the associated blur of the
PSF is of the order of few pixels, so we properly take into account the effect while reconstructing
the PSF. The dataset consists of on-axis observation of a bright star (HD 873, R=8.57 mag). The
star has been also used as AO reference, thus obtaining the best correction from the AO system
along the direction of the target. In this case, 20 images of 0.313 s have been considered. The mea-
sured seeing was 1.20 arcsec and the wind speed 3.4 m/s. Using a bright target, the frequency of
AO correction could be raised to 1700 Hz, with a resulting saving rate for the associated telemetry
of 850 frames/s (decimated by a factor 2). The measured SR is 0.58 and the FWHM 43.95 mas
(2.93 px). Also in this case, all the images of the point source are not saturated and within the linear
regime of the detector. The ﬁnal SNR per pixel of the observed PSF is 50 at the peak, decreasing
to a mean value of 10 at 300 mas. For this dataset, a mean SNR per pixel= 1 is reached around
1.3 arcsec (90px) from PSF centre. The difference between the SNR radial trend of the two dataset
is due to the different bandwidth of the ﬁlters used for each dataset: a broadband one for daytime
and a narrowband one for nighttime. The variation in environmental conditions during the obser-
vations is also a contributing factor. The observed PSF is shown in the left panel of Figure 3, the
reconstructed one in the central panel. In the reconstructed PSF it can be noted a feeble ring-like
structure, with a radius of ∼ 0.6 arcsec (∼ 40 px). This approximately coincides with the expected
location of the control radius, which delimits the region of the PSF affected by AO correction. This
ring-like structure leaves a trace also in the residuals, shown in the right panel of Figure 3, and it
is due to the method used in the adopted PSF-R algorithm to treat corrected spatial modes.

4 Results and Discussion

In this section, we detail the performance of the adopted PSF-R algorithm. A qualitative analysis
of Figures 2 and 3 corroborates the good match between the observed and reconstructed PSF.
In particular, the residuals shown on the right panels suggest that the core of the PSF is well

9

Table 3 Properties of the observed and reconstructed PSFs for both datasets. See text for details.

RED

Parameter
DAYTIME
SR
FWHM[mas]
EEcore
R50[mas]
χ2
Corr. with OBS.
NIGHTTIME
SR
FWHM[mas]
EEcore
R50[mas]
χ2
Corr. with OBS.

RED

OBS. REC. DIFF. [%]

0.59
44.10
0.43
50.23

0.58
43.80
0.43
52.92

0.58
43.80
0.43
53.97
4.63
0.996

0.59
45.75
0.45
50.83
3.27
0.995

1.7
0.7
1.9
7.4

1.7
4.4
4.0
3.9

reproduced. More quantitatively, a collection of the most relevant properties of the observed and
reconstructed PSFs is provided in Table 3. For each dataset and PSF, we report the measured SR
and FWHM. The EE - deﬁned as the amount of PSF energy that is contained within a ﬁxed circular
aperture, centered on the PSF center - in the core of the PSF, EEcore, is also listed. The radius of the
aperture, in this case, has been ﬁxed to 40.4 mas (2.7 px): the expected FWHM of the diffraction
limited PSF. R50 is the aperture (in mas) that contains 50% of the total light.

Table 4 As in Table 3 but for the diffraction limited case and the best ﬁt to the observed PSF with an analytic proﬁle
that is the sum of 2 Moffat functions.

Parameter

OBS D.L. DIFF.

MoffatDIFF.

[%]

[%]

with

DAYTIME
SR
FWHM[mas]
EEcore
R50[mas]
χ2
RED
Corr.
OBS.
NIGHTTIME
SR
FWHM[mas]
EEcore
R50[mas]
χ2
RED
Corr.
OBS.

with

0.61 3.4
0.59 1.00
44.10 40.36 8.5
44.10 0.0
0.43 0.62 44.1 0.44 2.3
50.23 30.20 39.9 48.14 4.2

10.70
0.974

4.97
0.997

0.60 3.4
0.58 1.00
43.80 0.0
43.80 40.07 8.5
0.43 0.62 44.1 0.44 2.3
52.92 30.50 42.4 49.78 5.9

8.27
0.982

6.02
0.995

10

Fig 4 Radial proﬁle (mean over all angles) of the observed PSF (black) and the reconstructed PSF (red). Left panel is
for daytime, while the right one is for nighttime. The associated standard deviations are indicated with shaded regions.
For comparison, the radial proﬁle of the diffraction limited PSF (D. L.) is also shown (blue dot-dashed line). The green
proﬁle on bottom shows the normalized deviation, as a function of distance, of the reconstructed PSF with respect to
the observed one. The associated standard deviation is represented as a shaded area. We computed this quantity as the
quadratic sum of the standard deviations associated to observed and reconstructed PSFs.

Finally, to quantify the match between the observed PSF and the reconstructed one, two pa-
rameters are listed in Table 3. The ﬁrst is χ2
RED which is the reduced χ2 between observed and
reconstructed PSFs. It has been obtained using GALFIT24 on the observed PSF with the recon-
structed PSF as input. The center position of a “psf” model has been set as the only free parameter
for the ﬁt and an input rms image has been created directly from the science data. The second
parameter is the correlation level between the observed PSF and the reconstructed one. It is mea-
sured pixel-per-pixel over the whole PSF image (8 arcsec2) by means of Pearson R index. For
comparison, the same parameter list is also provided in Table 4 for the diffraction limited case. We
also include in the table the results associated to the best ﬁt of the observed PSFs with an analytic
proﬁle, the sum of 2 Moffat functions. The choice is motivated by the fact that ﬁtting a single
Moffat function does not provide a good match on both the core and the wings of the observed
PSF simultaneously (Ref. 25 and references therein).

Table 3 shows that the reconstructed PSFs match extremely well the observed ones, both for
daytime and nighttime data. Indeed, the SR is recovered with an accuracy of 1.7% in both cases.
To further discuss the other parameters, we compare the radial proﬁle of the observed and recon-
structed PSFs. They are reported in Figure 4 for daytime (left panel) and nighttime (right panel).
The radial proﬁle of the diffraction limited PSF is also provided for comparison. For completeness,
the relative differences between observed and reconstructed PSF are also reported on the insets on
top. In both cases, the radial proﬁle of the reconstructed PSF nicely follows the observed one,
particularly in the central regions. This is conﬁrmed by the measured FWHM of the reconstructed
PSFs that are accurate at the level of 1% and 4% for daytime and nighttime, respectively. This
translates into differences of the order of 2 mas (0.13 px) in the worst case. Even the EEcore in the
core is fairly reproduced, with a precision better than 4% in both cases. Moving outwards to around

11

50 mas (3.5 px), the light distribution of the reconstructed PSF keeps following the observed one
with errors on R50 of the order of 7% and 4% for daytime and nighttime respectively (0.25 px in the
worst case). For larger apertures, small deviations (relative difference < 1) are present in the radial
proﬁles of the reconstructed PSFs with respect to the observed ones. In particular, we note the
bump in the radial proﬁle of the nighttime reconstructed PSF, associated to the ring-like structure
visible in Figure 3. This feature, however, does not seem to affect signiﬁcantly the match between
observed and reconstructed PSF, as demonstrated by the associated low χ2
RED and high correlation
level values. Consistent values are found also in the daytime case.

For what concerns the comparison with other PSFs, the diffraction limited PSF does not per-
form as well as the reconstructed one. All the values reported in Table 4 indicate larger deviations
than what has been obtained with the reconstructed PSFs. Furthermore, in the case of the two-
Moffat ﬁt, EEcore and R50 are well recovered, as expected, but the χ2
RED and correlation level
values indicate that the reconstructed PSFs work equally well or even slightly better than the ana-
lytic proﬁle.

4.1 Impact of the PSF-R on an ideal science case

The aim of this work is to obtain a reliable estimate of the differences between the reconstructed
PSF and the observed one (as listed in Table 3), and to test the applicability of the reconstruction to
an ideal science case. In this section, we aim to deﬁne a general method to assess how differences
between observed and reconstructed PSF translate into errors on the scientiﬁc measurements. In
fact, the same information should be used to deﬁne constraints on the reconstructed PSFs to meet
the requirements for the precision on selected science measurements. For this reason, we limited
as much as possible the effects of other factors related to speciﬁc observation. In particular, we
envisaged a representative case where the reconstruction of the PSF is critical to reach the scientiﬁc
goal and take advantage of the knowledge of the observed (true) PSF to assess quantitatively the
potential differences that can be revealed as a comparison.

As an example, we consider the case of a distant (e.g. z ∼ 1.5), bright and compact (e.g.
effective radius comparable to the FWHM of the PSF) galaxy. We investigate what accuracy
on the structural parameters is achieved when modelling the 2D light proﬁle of the galaxy with
GALFIT using our reconstructed PSF model. For simplicity, we consider a galaxy whose light
distribution can be described by a S´ersic proﬁle. We did not simulate galactic substructures that,
albeit more realistic, would complicate the interpretation of our results. Similarly, we chose to
simulate a bright galaxy to assess the effects of the faint and outer region of the PSF, which would
be hidden with a lower SNR, but are fundamental because these are the most noticeable differences
between the observed and the reconstructed PSF. The parameters of the simulated galaxy are:
integrated magnitude mVega = 17.5 mag; S´ersic index n = 3.9; effective radius Re = 94 mas
(6 px, corresponding to ∼ 2 FWHM); axis ratio of 0.28. These values, with the exception of the
integrated magnitude, are typical for a red nugget, an early type galaxy, at redshift z ∼ 1.526 .

To produce the mock observations, we make extensive use of SimCADO27, 28 , which we tuned
accordingly to simulate SOUL+LUCI. We considered an exposure time of 54000 s, subdivided into
180 frames (DIT) of 300 s each. To ensure a statistical signiﬁcance of the results, we generated 100
mock observations of the same model galaxy, adding at each time random white noise.

The analysis is subdivided in two main parts: the simulation of the observations and the mea-
surement. The simulated observations have been generated by convolving a pure S´ersic model

12

Fig 5 Left panel. Simulated galaxy. A 3.7 arcsec2 (128px × 128px) window is shown. The nighttime observed PSF
is used as input to generate the simulated observation. Central panel. The best-ﬁt GALFIT S´ersic model. In this case,
the reconstructed PSF is used as the input PSF for GALFIT. Right panel. Normalized residuals. The color scale is
linear, the colorbar is shown on the bottom. The normalization has been done dividing the residuals by the simulated
observation. It can be noted the excellent agreement between observation and model, despite the two being obtained
using the observed and reconstructed PSF as input, respectively. The contours in the left and central panels refer to the
same count levels.

with the observed PSF. A zoom-in of the central 128 × 128 px is presented in the left panel of
Figure 5. The measurements have been performed with GALFIT giving different PSFs as input to
the software: i) the observed PSF, for the control measure; ii) the reconstructed PSF, for the actual
measure; iii) the diffraction limited PSF, for comparison; iv) no PSF at all, again for comparison.
The best-ﬁt GALFIT model (a pure S´ersic proﬁle) associated to the reconstructed PSF is shown in
the central panel of Figure 5. The contours in the central region of the galaxy mark the same count
levels as in the left panel: it can be noted the good agreement between the simulated galaxy and the
model. This is emphasized by the normalized residuals, presented in the right panel of Figure 5.
No evident residual structures can be detected.

Quantitatively, all the morphological parameters are in good agreement. We report in Table 5
the mean differences between recovered and input values along with the associated standard devi-
ations. The table includes the results also for the control measure, the diffraction limited case, and
the case where no PSF has been provided to GALFIT. The associated box plots are shown in Fig-
ure 6, representing the distribution of the deviations from input values for the 100 simulations. The
main parameters are shown, namely the integrated magnitude, the effective radius Re, the S´ersic
index n, and the axis ratio b/a (from top to bottom). The loss of accuracy is more noticeable for
the case where no PSF at all is provided to GALFIT, conﬁrming the need of the observed PSF in
this particular case.

From Table 5 and Figure 6 it can be noted that the recovered S´ersic index is somewhat biased
towards smaller values. The best-ﬁt model obtained providing the reconstructed PSF to GALFIT
has a n value 2σ lower than expected. As a general consideration, although an optimization of
the analysis is possible (but beyond the aim of this study), our two-dimensional ﬁt is performed
successfully and the galaxy can be classiﬁed in all the cases as an early type object (having 2.5 <
n < 4).

13

Table 5 Scientiﬁc evaluation results. The mean deviation from input values and associated standard deviation are
reported for the main morphological parameters. Speciﬁcally, they are: the centre position (x and y), the integrated
magnitude, effective radius, S´ersic index, axis ratio and position angle of the galaxy. The input galaxy is obtained using
the observed PSF, while each column refers to the different PSF used by GALFIT to recover the input parameters. In
particular: the control measure has been obtained using the observed PSF also in the ﬁt, while the one labelled ”REC.”
has been obtained using the reconstructed PSF. For completeness, we reported also the results obtained using the
diffraction limited PSF and those without providing any PSF at all as input to GALFIT (”NONE”).

Parameter
x[mas]
y[mas]
int. mag. [mag]
Re[mas]
n
b/a
PA[deg]

OBS. [CONTROL]

D.L.

REC.

NONE
0.000 ± 0.164 −0.194 ± 0.179 −0.164 ± 0.164 −0.120 ± 0.284
0.000 ± 0.149
0.119 ± 0.017
69.5773 ± 6.055
0.421 ± 0.486 −1.640 ± 0.087
0.002 ± 0.005
0.217 ± 0.005
0.103 ± 0.006
0.095 ± 0.167 −0.621 ± 0.150 −0.896 ± 0.232 −0.737 ± 0.229

−0.045 ± 0.105 −0.030 ± 0.105 −0.105 ± 0.105
0.020 ± 0.034
−0.002 ± 0.019 −0.009 ± 0.016
41.845 ± 11.168
2.497 ± 2.272
−0.807 ± 3.005
−0.105 ± 0.324 −0.841 ± 0.188
0.042 ± 0.005

To further assess whether the discrepancy between the measured and intrinsic S´ersic index is
due to our PSF reconstruction, we also applied a mask on both observed and reconstructed PSFs
selecting only the pixels inside a given cutting radius (RCUT). We then performed the same anal-
ysis described above, using the masked observed PSF to simulate the observations and giving the
masked reconstructed one as input to GALFIT to recover the structural parameters of the galaxy.
While gradually increasing RCUT, we record the variations in the measured morphological param-
eters.

We ﬁnd that the only morphological parameter affected is indeed the S´ersic index. The be-
haviour of the measured n as a function of RCUT is reported in Figure 7. If the central 29 px of
the PSFs (RCUT = 3 px = 44.85 mas) are considered, the differences between the reconstructed
Increasing RCUT, the recovered S´ersic index progressively
and observed PSFs are negligible.
shifts towards lower values, suggesting that the bias in the measure of this morphological param-
eter is due to the non-perfect reconstruction of the wings of the observed PSF. Speciﬁcally, for
RCUT > 45 mas, the difference between measured and input n values steeply increases up to −0.3
at RCUT (cid:46) 90 mas. The recovered n value remains almost constant up to RCUT (cid:46) 0.4 arcsec, from
where a shallow increase in the deviation from input values is resumed.

5 Summary and Conclusions

PSF reconstruction is a fundamental tool to analyze the data from AO instrumentation. It will
support state-of-the-art scientiﬁc analysis of imaging and spectroscopic data. It is worth stressing
here the fact that having a number of bright and isolated point sources in the observed ﬁeld allows
the PSF characterization directly from the science frames. This, however, can be tricky, in the case
of AO observations where the PSF changes both with distance from the AO reference and in time.
The PSF-R technique allows to obtain the PSF of an astronomical observation simply from
synchronous WFS telemetry data, without any access to the focal plane data. This is an unavoidable
solution when there is no bright and isolated star in the instrumental FoV, suitable for deriving the
observed PSF.

14

Fig 6 Box plots of the measured deviations from input values for integrated magnitude, effective radius Re, S´ersic
index n, and axis ratio b/a from top to bottom. The control measure has been obtained using the observed PSF (the
same used to produce the simulated observations) as input for GALFIT. On the contrary, the actual measure (REC.)
has been obtained using the reconstructed PSF as input for GALFIT. For completeness, the box plots are shown also
for the case where the diffraction limited PSF is given as input to GALFIT and when no PSF at all was provided as
input to the software.

We have attempted here to carry out a PSF reconstruction of SOUL+LUCI LBT observations
of bright, on-axis point sources in order to test the PSF-R code we are developing. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst published work to apply the PSF-R technique to real AO data
acquired with a pyramid WFS. We have also carried out the PSF-R of an artiﬁcial source (an
illuminated ﬁber), with optical turbulence disturbance generated and corrected using the Adaptive
Secondary of LBT: these results have been already discussed in a preliminary stage by Ref. 16.

15

Fig 7 Mean deviation from the input value of the measured S´ersic index as a function of the cutting radius (RCUT)
used to mask the external regions of both oberved and reconstructed PSFs. While the PSFs cores are very similar, the
small differences in the wings of the PSFs translate into a deviation of the measured S´ersic index from the input value.
After an initial settling to −0.3, the deviation resumes a shallow increase for RCUT (cid:38) 375 mas.

The controlled atmospheric conditions allow to check that the tool is able to successfully recover
the injected perturbations.

The PSF-R software we have used is able to reproduce the observed FWHM, EE, and SR
with an accuracy of 2-4%, which is comparable to the level of accuracy reached by hybrid or
calibrated techniques (see e.g. PRIME29, 30). Moreover, the reconstructed PSF provides a better ﬁt
to the observed data than the diffraction limited one. This level of agreement points to a successful
approach of the adopted PSF-R algorithm, which matches a technology readiness level equal to 7,
following the international ranking deﬁned by the ISO 16290/2013 standard.

With the present work, we aim at setting the foundations for forthcoming analysis and reﬁne-
ments of the adopted PSF-R method. An effort is needed in order to improve the representation
of the wings (at > 0.3 arcsec = 20 px) of the reconstructed PSF. It is worth mentioning that even
when bright stars are present in the FoV, empirical PSF methods would not be able to provide
an accurate description of the PSF wings. In the near future, we plan focussing on the treatment
of off-axis (anisoplanatism) corrections and testing the PSF-R algorithm in the case of crowded
stellar ﬁelds, e.g. in the case of a globular cluster.

This kind of studies paves the way for exploiting AO data reduction for ELT-size telescope
observations of dense stellar ﬁelds or individual extra-galactic objects. The PSF-R software shown
here will be an important starting point for developing a similar software for MICADO, the ﬁrst-
light camera of ELT, which will adopt a pyramid WFS similar to SOUL in its SCAO observing
mode. In light of the future implementation of the MAORY module on MICADO, our group is
also contributing in extending the algorithm to MCAO systems. It is worth noting that in the ELT
the halo of a star will be a factor of ∼5 larger than in LBT, and thus it will have a much lower

16

surface brightness (a factor of ∼ 25 fainter). On the other hand, the core of the PSF is a factor ∼5
narrower in diameter. This means that, especially at longer wavelengths, even for bright stars the
halo will be barely detected as a distinct feature, and that multiple halos will be blended into a faint
distributed background. This indicates that the PSF-R approach will be even more important in the
future for 30-40m class telescopes. Only for stars that are bright enough to saturate, the outer halo
becomes visible, thus the hybrid or calibrated PSF-R techniques will not be suitable in this case.

A ﬁrst stage of scientiﬁc evaluation of the reconstructed PSFs has been carried out by simulat-
ing a long SOUL+LUCI LBT observation of a compact early type galaxy (red nugget) at z ∼ 1.5.
The reconstructed PSF allows us to derive the physical parameters (position, magnitude, half light
radius) of the galaxy within 1 σ level with GALFIT, while the S´ersic index is reproduced with
an accuracy of ∼ 2 σ. The axis ratio b/a and position angle are reproduced within 5% and 0.6
degree, respectively. We propose that the possible systematic shift of the S´ersic index could be due
to a non perfect representation of the wings of the reconstructed PSF with respect to the observed
one. In summary, PSF reconstruction from telemetry data only is strongly required if one needs
to obtain precise morphological measurements, since typical high-z galaxies are usually observed
in blank extra-galactic ﬁelds. In this respect, the results of the presented analysis are extremely
encouraging.

Lastly, we discuss, in the appendix, an interesting relation linking EE, the FWHM, and SR
of the observed PSF that can be useful e.g. when one is interested in computing an instrument
sensitivity.

We can conclude that the PSF-R approach presented here is an innovative method for pyramid

WFS.

Appendix A: A practical relation linking SR, FWHM, and EE

In this appendix we present a useful relation that links the observed EE (EEOBS) to the measured
SR. Its application is of particular interest i.e. in the case that, for an AO systems, one is interested
in the energy concentration in the core of the observed PSF knowing only the associated SR and
FWHM with the ﬁnal goal of computing an instrument sensitivity. The SR is deﬁned as the ratio
of the punctual peak values of the observed PSF and the diffraction limited one. A typical method
for sensitivity computation is to consider the SR for the calculation of the Encircled Energy within
the PSF core:

EEcore,OBS,uncorrected (cid:39) SR · EEcore,DL .

(6)

In case of AO systems performing very well, e.g. SR> 30 − 50%, the core of the PSF can be
assumed as the area within the ﬁrst minimum of the associated Airy function (i.e. the diffraction
limited PSF). Nevertheless, in these conditions, wrongly assuming that within this area one can
ﬁnd a SR-percentage of the ﬂux corresponding to the Airy ﬁgure, brings to an underestimation of
the ﬂux within the aperture.

To overcome this problem, a correction can be made in the above equation by means of a factor
that accounts for the actual PSF shape. On a ﬁrst approximation, this shape factor corresponds
to the combined effect of the very-low order modes corrected by the AO. The shape of the core
is dominated by the residuals of these few modes. In real cases, tip-tilt residuals represent the
majority of the uncorrected low-order fraction for two main reasons: i) because Kolmogorov power
spectrum puts there 90% of the energy and ii) because the largest non-turbulence wavefront error
derives from telescope and instrument vibration (that may be as large as the atmospheric jitter and

17

much faster). Moreover, the correlation time of the atmospheric tip tilt - proportional to the ratio of
wind velocity and telescope diameter - puts it in the 1 − 10 Hz31 , while the typical vibration power
spectrum has peaks in the 10 − 100 Hz region. When the PSF peak is similar to the diffraction
limited regime, corresponding to relatively high SR (SR > 30% − 50%), one may correct the
equation above by adding the shape-factor:

EEcore,OBS,corrected (cid:39) SR · EEcore,DL ·

(cid:18) F W HMOBS
F W HMDL

(cid:19)2

(7)

and if opto-mechanical vibrations dominate the low-order residuals it can be restricted to the tip-tilt
component

EEcore,OBS,corrected (cid:39) SR · EEcore,DL ·

(cid:18)F W HM 2

V IBRAT ION

F W HM 2

DL

(cid:19)

+ 1

,

(8)

where the F W HMV IBRAT ION is the standard deviation of the jitter due to the vibration compo-
nent. In fact, under the hypothesis that both the residual vibrations component, uncorrected or
introduced by the AO system, and the PSF core can be approximated by Gaussian functions, the
broadening of the registered PSF is a function of the standard deviation associated to the vibration
component. In particular, it is straightforward to derive that the peak value of the registered PSF
is proportional to F W HM −2
OBS. It is also important to note that the ratio of EEs operates as a nor-
malization factor, correlating with the amount of uncorrected photons outside the control radius
of the AO system, deﬁned as the distance from PSF centre where light distorted by uncorrected
high-order spatial frequencies resumes following a seeing-limited distribution32 .

If applied to the nighttime dataset, Equation (6) gives EEcore,OBS,uncorrected = 0.36, in contrast

with the observed value of EEcore,OBS = 0.43. The shape factor in this case results:

(cid:18) F W HMOBS
F W HMDL

(cid:19)2

(cid:19)2

=

(cid:18) 43.80
40.07

= 1.19

(9)

Thus, applying Equation (7) it results EEcore,OBS,corrected = 0.43 in perfect agreement with the
observed value. From Equation (8) one can also compute the expected standard deviation associ-
ated to the residual vibration component. In the case of nighttime dataset, this amount to 7.4 mas.
For comparison, it results from telemetry that the amount of tip-tilt only in the WF residuals sum up
to 3.9 mas, indicating that other peak-broadening are likely occurring (i.e. defocus-astigmatisms,
chromatic dispersion).

Equation (7) provides accurate results only under particular conditions. The major requirement
is that the low-order aberration effect needs to be smaller than the EE aperture. Indeed, the higher
is the broadening effect, the lower is EE inside a ﬁxed aperture, therefore invalidating the normal-
ization of the PSF. Speciﬁcally, the shape of the post-AO PSF inside the control radius matches as
close as possible that of the diffraction limited PSF, but with intensity hampered by the amount of
light outside the control radius associated to uncorrected modes.

We propose that a simple solution to avoid this issue is to take care in deﬁning the aperture
radius for EEcore of the order of F W HMOBS. In other words, we encourage the use of aperture
referring to actual, post-AO light distribution that implicitly takes into account the broadening due
to residual vibrations.

18

Fig 8 Application of Equation (6) (UNCORRECTED) and Equation (7) (CORRECTED) to mock diffraction limited
PSFs, each convolved with a 2D Gaussian function of varying standard deviations. The relative error in the resulting
EE are shown as a function of the standard deviation of the convolving 2D Gaussian (σV IBRAT ION ).

To quantify the limits of applicability of the relation in Equation (7), we performed a simple
simulation. We convolved the diffraction limited PSF, oversampled by a factor 5, with a 2D Gaus-
sian functions of varying standard deviations (from 1 to 20 mas). In this case, as the observed
PSF is obtained directly from the diffraction limited one, the lowering of SR values is only due
to the residual vibration effects, which do not affect sensibly the wings of the PSF. Therefore, the
effect of the aperture choice can also be estimated. We then measured the associated EEcore,OBS
and EEcore,DL inside an aperture of radius REE,core = F W HMOBS. We also measured the SR
directly from the resulting PSF. We then compared the measure EEcore,OBS with those computed
using Equations (6) and (7). The results are reported in Figure 8. It can be observed that, after
properly deﬁning the aperture, Equation (7) correctly estimates the observed EEcore,OBS within
10% accuracy for a wide range of residual vibrations.

Acknowledgements

We thank the anonymous referees for their thorough revision that enhanced the quality of the
present work. This work has been partly supported by INAF through the Math, ASTronomy and
Research (MAST&R), a working group for mathematical methods for high-resolution imaging.
Based on observations made at the Large Binocular Telescope (LBT) at Mt. Graham (Arizona,

19

USA). The LBT is an international collaboration among institutions in the United States, Italy and
Germany. LBT Corporation partners are: The University of Arizona on behalf of the Arizona uni-
versity system; Istituto Nazionale di Astroﬁsica, Italy; LBT Beteiligungsgesellschaft, Germany,
representing the Max-Planck Society, the Astrophysical Institute Potsdam, and Heidelberg Uni-
versity; The Ohio State University, and The Research Corporation, on behalf of The University of
Notre Dame, University of Minnesota and University of Virginia.

References

1 P. Wizinowich, D. S. Acton, C. Shelton, et al., “First Light Adaptive Optics Images from the
Keck II Telescope: A New Era of High Angular Resolution Imagery,” Publications of the
ASP 112, 315–319 (2000).

2 R. Davies and M. Kasper, “Adaptive Optics for Astronomy,” Annual Review of Astron and

Astrophys 50, 305–351 (2012).

3 R. Davies, J. Schubert, M. Hartl, et al., “MICADO: ﬁrst light imager for the E-ELT,” in
Ground-based and Airborne Instrumentation for Astronomy VI, C. J. Evans, L. Simard, and
H. Takami, Eds., Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference
Series 9908, 99081Z (2016).

4 R. Davies, S. Esposito, H. M. Schmid, et al., “ERIS: revitalising an adaptive optics instrument
for the VLT,” in Ground-based and Airborne Instrumentation for Astronomy VII, C. J. Evans,
L. Simard, and H. Takami, Eds., Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE)
Conference Series 10702, 1070209 (2018).

5 C. Arcidiacono, E. Portaluri, M. Cantiello, et al., “MAORY science preparation status,”
in Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, Society
of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series 11448, 114482W
(2020).

6 F. Rigaut, R. McDermid, G. Cresci, et al., “MAVIS conceptual design,” in Society of Photo-
Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, Society of Photo-Optical In-
strumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series 11447, 114471R (2020).

7 O. Beltramo-Martin, S. Ragland, R. F´etick, et al., “Review of PSF reconstruction methods
and application to post-processing,” in Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers
(SPIE) Conference Series, Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Con-
ference Series 11448, 114480A (2020).

8 H. W. Babcock, “The Possibility of Compensating Astronomical Seeing,” Publications of the

ASP 65, 229 (1953).

9 J. M. Beckers, “Increasing the Size of the Isoplanatic Patch with Multiconjugate Adaptive
Optics,” in Very Large Telescopes and their Instrumentation, Vol. 2, European Southern Ob-
servatory Conference and Workshop Proceedings 30, 693 (1988).

10 F. Rigaut and B. Neichel, “Multiconjugate Adaptive Optics for Astronomy,” Annual Review

of Astron and Astrophys 56, 277–314 (2018).

11 R. Foy and A. Labeyrie, “Feasibility of adaptive telescope with laser probe,” Astronomy and

Astrophysics 152, L29–L31 (1985).

12 L. Girardi, M. A. T. Groenewegen, E. Hatziminaoglou, et al., “Star counts in the Galaxy.
Simulating from very deep to very shallow photometric surveys with the TRILEGAL code,”
Astronomy and Astrophysics 436, 895–915 (2005).

20

13 J. P. Veran, F. Rigaut, H. Maitre, et al., “Estimation of the adaptive optics long-exposure
point-spread function using control loop data.,” Journal of the Optical Society of America A
14, 3057–3069 (1997).

14 R. Wagner, C. Hofer, and R. Ramlau, “Point spread function reconstruction for single-
conjugate adaptive optics on extremely large telescopes,” Journal of Astronomical Telescopes,
Instruments, and Systems 4, 049003 (2018).

15 J. M. Hill, “The Large Binocular Telescope,” Applied Optics 49, D115 (2010).
16 M. Simioni, C. Arcidiacono, A. Grazian, et al., “MICADO PSF-reconstruction work pack-
age description,” in Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference
Series, Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series 11448,
1144837 (2020).

17 E. Pinna, S. Esposito, P. Hinz, et al., “SOUL: the Single conjugated adaptive Optics Upgrade
for LBT,” in Adaptive Optics Systems V, E. Marchetti, L. M. Close, and J.-P. V´eran, Eds.,
Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series 9909, 99093V
(2016).

18 W. Seifert, I. Appenzeller, H. Baumeister, et al., “LUCIFER: a Multi-Mode NIR Instrument
for the LBT,” in Instrument Design and Performance for Optical/Infrared Ground-based
Telescopes, M. Iye and A. F. M. Moorwood, Eds., Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation
Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series 4841, 962–973 (2003).

19 G. Agapito, F. Rossi, C. Plantet, et al., “Advances in control of a pyramid single conjugate

adaptive optics system,” Monthly Notices of the RAS 508, 1745–1755 (2021).

20 A. Riccardi, M. Xompero, D. Zanotti, et al., “The adaptive secondary mirror for the Large
Binocular Telescope: results of acceptance laboratory test,” in Adaptive Optics Systems,
N. Hubin, C. E. Max, and P. L. Wizinowich, Eds., Society of Photo-Optical Instrumenta-
tion Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series 7015, 701512 (2008).

21 V. Korkiakoski, C. V´erinaud, and M. Le Louarn, “Applying sensitivity compensation for
pyramid wavefront sensor in different conditions,” in Adaptive Optics Systems, N. Hubin,
C. E. Max, and P. L. Wizinowich, Eds., Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers
(SPIE) Conference Series 7015, 701554 (2008).

22 S. Esposito, A. Riccardi, L. Fini, et al., “First light AO (FLAO) system for LBT: ﬁnal integra-
tion, acceptance test in Europe, and preliminary on-sky commissioning results,” in Adaptive
Optics Systems II, B. L. Ellerbroek, M. Hart, N. Hubin, et al., Eds., Society of Photo-Optical
Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series 7736, 773609 (2010).

23 A. Riccardi, G. Brusa, P. Salinari, et al., “Adaptive secondary mirrors for the Large binocu-
lar telescope,” in Astronomical Adaptive Optics Systems and Applications, R. K. Tyson and
M. Lloyd-Hart, Eds., Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference
Series 5169, 159–168 (2003).

24 C. Y. Peng, L. C. Ho, C. D. Impey, et al., “Detailed Decomposition of Galaxy Images. II.

Beyond Axisymmetric Models,” Astronomical Journal 139, 2097–2129 (2010).

25 E. Portaluri, V. Viotto, M. Gullieuszik, et al., “High-z galaxies simulations: a benchmark for
Global-MCAO,” in Adaptive Optics Systems V, E. Marchetti, L. M. Close, and J.-P. V´eran,
Eds., Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series 9909,
99095Y (2016).

21

26 I. Damjanov, P. J. McCarthy, R. G. Abraham, et al., “Red Nuggets at z ˜1.5: Compact Passive
Galaxies and the Formation of the Kormendy Relation,” Astrophysical Journal 695, 101–115
(2009).

27 K. Leschinski, O. Czoske, R. K¨ohler, et al., “SimCADO: an instrument data simulator pack-
age for MICADO at the E-ELT,” in Modeling, Systems Engineering, and Project Management
for Astronomy VI, G. Z. Angeli and P. Dierickx, Eds., Society of Photo-Optical Instrumenta-
tion Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series 9911, 991124 (2016).

28 K. Leschinski, H. Buddelmeijer, O. Czoske, et al., “ScopeSim: a ﬂexible general purpose
astronomical instrument data simulation framework in Python,” in Society of Photo-Optical
Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, Society of Photo-Optical Instrumenta-
tion Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series 11452, 114521Z (2020).

29 O. Beltramo-Martin, A. Marasco, T. Fusco, et al., “Pushing point-spread function reconstruc-
tion to the next level: application to SPHERE/ZIMPOL,” Monthly Notices of the RAS 494,
775–788 (2020).

30 D. Massari, A. Marasco, O. Beltramo-Martin, et al., “Successful application of PSF-R tech-
niques to the case of the globular cluster NGC 6121 (M 4),” Astronomy and Astrophysics 634,
L5 (2020).

31 G. A. Chanan, “Calculation of wave-front-tilt correlations associated with atmospheric tur-

bulence.,” Journal of the Optical Society of America A 9, 298–301 (1992).

32 M. D. Perrin, A. Sivaramakrishnan, R. B. Makidon, et al., “The Structure of High Strehl

Ratio Point-Spread Functions,” Astrophysical Journal 596, 702–712 (2003).

22

