2
2
0
2

p
e
S
2

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
5
2
1
0
.
9
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Mixed Reality for Mechanical Design and
Assembly Planning

Emran Poh1, Kyrin Liong2, and Jeannie S.A. Lee1

1 Infocomm Technology, Singapore Institute of Technology, Singapore
2 Engineering, Singapore Institute of Technology, Singapore
{emran.poh, kyrin.liong, jeannie.lee}@singaporetech.edu.sg

Abstract. Design for Manufacturing and Assembly (DFMA) is a cru-
cial design stage within the heavy vehicle manufacturing process that
involves optimising the order and feasibility of the parts assembly pro-
cess to reduce manufacturing complexity and overall cost. Existing work
has focused on conducting DFMA within virtual environments to reduce
manufacturing costs, but users are less able to relate and compare phys-
ical characteristics of a virtual component with real physical objects.
Therefore, a Mixed Reality (MR) application is developed for engineers
to visualise and manipulate assembly parts virtually, conduct and plan
out an assembly within its intended physical environment. Two pilot
evaluations were conducted with both engineering professionals and non-
engineers to assess eﬀectiveness of the software for assembly planning.
Usability results suggest that the application is overall usable (M=56.1,
SD=7.89), and participants felt a sense of involvement in the activity
(M=13.1, SD=3.3). Engineering professionals see the application as a
useful and cost-eﬀective tool for optimising their mechanical assembly
designs.

Keywords: Assembly Planning · Mixed Reality · Gesture · 3D User
Interface · Digital Twin

1

Introduction

The ability to realistically visualise and intuitively manipulate an engineering
assembly is key to an eﬃcient design process [6]. When presented with a large
assembly with heavy components, it is vital to cost-optimise its design and as-
sembly process to mitigate prototyping costs. This ‘optimisation’ is known as
DFMA, and improves upon areas such as material selection, machining toler-
ances, and most importantly the order of assembly of complex components to
lower manufacturing and assembly overheads.

Existing work has explored conducting DFMA in virtual environments to
reduce physical prototyping, however users are less able to do spatial correla-
tion [6–8]. Spatial correlation refers to the ability to visualise, relate, and com-
pare physical characteristics of a virtual object with real physical objects or
environment. Within the context of virtual DFMA, the capability of visualising

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

Poh et al.

a virtual assembly within its intended environment is vital for assembly plan-
ning. Augmented Reality (AR) has also been utilised to allow virtual assemblies
to be overlaid onto physical environments for visualisation, although with lim-
ited interaction [10, 13]. Mixed Reality (MR) presents a useful platform where
engineers will be able to intuitively interact, conduct design reviews without pro-
totyping, and visualise their virtual Computer-Aided Design (CAD) assemblies
within their intended physical environment.

Understanding the requirements of conducting an assembly within a mixed
reality environment through a requirements gathering session, the goal is to
develop an intuitive and eﬀective MR application for conducting assembly plan-
ning. Two pilot studies were conducted to quantitatively and qualitatively eval-
uate the usability of the proposed application and gather useful insight into its
eﬀectiveness and learnability.

2 Related Work

Existing virtual assembly planning systems allow users to be able to visualise
and evaluate the assembly of their mechanical systems in various virtual environ-
ments with diﬀerent tools. External controllers such as a mouse [5] or a haptic
device [4] provide a physical object for the user to interact with the virtual en-
vironment, however will incur cost for setting up the tracking system for each
device. VR-based systems [2,6,11,12] provide a useful platform for simulating dif-
ferent environments, however it is limited in its ability to replicate dynamic and
realistic environments. AR systems [10] addresses the lack of spatial correlation
through overlaying useful information onto physical surfaces, however the virtual
objects do not interact with the physical world. While conducting engineering
design reviews in a virtual environment shortens the product development life-
cycle and lowers manufacturing overheads [7, 9], these systems lack the spatial
awareness needed to conduct feasibility tests of comparing the virtual models
within a real physical environment. Mixed reality presents a platform in which
virtual objects could interact with the physical world through spatial mapping
and gesture interaction. Through conducting assembly planning within MR, the
user will be able to visualise and iterate on their designs quickly, intuitively
interact with their virtual models, and reduce manufacturing and prototyping
overheads.

3 Assembly Planning Features

The goal of this work is to utilise MR as a platform to conduct engineering
design reviews. A list of assembly planning features were obtained through a
requirement gathering session with professional design engineers. Within the list,
three primary categories of features were identiﬁed: Component Manipulation,
Assembly Guidance, Spatial Awareness.

Mixed Reality for Mechanical Design and Assembly Planning

3

(a)

(b)

Fig. 1: Assembly Planning Features. a Component Browsing interface, ‘Bounds’
interface for Anchoring

Component Manipulation Being able to manipulate assembly component
parts is critical in testing and planning out possible manoeuvres for assembly. A
3D browsing interface (Fig 1a) enables the user to spawn and hide component
objects to allow the user to bring parts into the assembly area when the user
requires of it. A toggle button from the ’Hand Menu’, the user will be able to
toggle between freehand bi-manual manipulation and single-axis rotation.

Spatial Awareness Spatial awareness is critical in developing a useful MR
application, especially within the context of an engineering design review. Spatial
anchoring was added such that the virtual assembly model would be able to
adhere to a speciﬁc location in the real physical environment to improve transfer
of knowledge and correlation. This anchoring also helps in visualising the 1:1
scale of the model in real life. To provide a frame of reference for assembly
orientation, the Orientation Indicator rotates along with the user in relation
to the anchored assembly. Upon spawning a component, an arrow will appear

Table 1: List of Assembly Planning Features

Category

Feature

Component
Assembly Component Spawning
Manipulation Assembly Component Browsing

Manipulation (Single-Axis Rotation, Translation)

Spatial
Awareness

Assembly
Guidance

Spatial Anchoring
Orientation Indicator
Directional Indicator

Component Positioning Guidance
Audio Feedback
Component-to-Component Collision

4

Poh et al.

around the component pointing towards the direction of its position within the
anchored assembly.

Assembly Guidance To provide assembly guidance, a list of visual and audio
prompts were introduced to assist during assembly planning. Upon manipulation
of an assembly component, a translucent copy of the same component appears
in the position of where the component should be within the anchored assembly.
Component-To-Component collision is an eﬀective tool to deﬁnitively validate as-
sembly manoeuvres. To simulate this interaction, the components change colour
from a base colour of white (indicating no collision) to blue (indicating colli-
sion). Audio feedback emphasises any application events such as button presses,
component collisions, and manipulation.

4

Implementation

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 2: Vehicular Heavy Lifter with 13 parts (13 parts). (a) View of Assembly
Components with Orientation Indicator within MR View, (b) shows a completed
view of the assembly, (c) shows an exploded view of the assembly

All assembly planning features and interactions were built using gestures
and interaction components within Microsoft’s Mixed Reality Toolkit (MRTK).
The application was developed using Unity Engine and deployed and tested
on Microsoft Hololens 2. For the CAD models, the assembly model used were
designed and tested through SolidWorks and converted into a Unity-compatible
format using Blender. The subject (Figure 2) is a large assembly of a vehicular
heavy lifter (Dimensions: 3.5m x 1.5m x 2m, Actual Physical Assembly Weight:
4 tons).

The user is able to carry out several basic interactions for manipulation
and rotation through the attachment of ManipulationHandler script for input
detection and handling. For single axis rotation, the Bounds component provides
a visible interface which users could interact with to pivot the model along its
axes. To simulate collision, a non-convex collider is generated and attached to
each assembly component upon spawning. Upon contact between components,

Mixed Reality for Mechanical Design and Assembly Planning

5

(a)

(b)

Fig. 3: Component Collision Collider Implementation. (b) (From Left to Right)
Box Collider and the generated Non-Convex Collider. Base Component with Box
Collider. (b) (From Left to Right) Two solid assembly components in varying
levels of collision (No Collision, Colliding)

a collision event will be triggered which will modify the colour of the material of
each colliding components. To avoid false collisions caused by overlapping and
jagged colliders, a user-deﬁned parameter was introduced to deﬁne a margin of
error that the colliders could overlap before triggering a collision event.

5 Evaluation

To evaluate the eﬀectiveness of the application as a platform for assembly plan-
ning, two preliminary studies were conducted. First, the relative usability and
sense of ﬂow of the application was assessed by a group of users with little to no
existing expertise through a pilot quantitative study. Second, a pilot qualitative
study was conducted on a group of senior engineers to evaluate the eﬀectiveness
of the application for conducting a an assembly planning.

5.1 Pilot Quantitative Study and Results

In this study, participants (n=7, Age: 20-45) who have no prior experience
in mixed reality and engineering are required to assemble the vehicular lifter
through the use of all available assembly guidance. At the end of the assembly
session, the relative usability [1] and perceived ﬂow [3] of the application were
recorded.

The usability results from the experiment in Table 2 suggest that the interface
is empirically usable (M=56.07, SD=7.89). Given the lack of prior experience
in engineering or mixed reality, this could suggest that more visual instruction
may be necessary for ﬁrst-time users to navigate the application. Findings also
show in Table 3 that the participants felt that they were clear about their goals
(M=12.29, SD=1.60), had a sense of control when experiencing the application
(M=11.57, SD=1.51), and their thoughts ran somewhat smoothly with minor
diﬃculty in concentrating (M=17.00, SD=2.16). However, the participants felt
that there was too much challenge in understanding the interface and that they

6

Poh et al.

feel that they were somewhat competent (M=13.1, SD=3.3). Despite this, most
participants reported they enjoyed the experience (M=6.57, SD=1.13).

5.2 Pilot Qualitative Study and Results

A pilot think-aloud was conducted on senior design engineers (n=3, Age: 35-
50) to assess the feasibility of the features developed in the application. The
participants had 8 to 10 years of experience in coordinating assembly planning
and conducting design reviews. The participants were required to assemble the
heavy vehicular loader. A thematic analysis was conducted upon the think-aloud
and semi-structured feedback by the participants.

During the walkthrough, participants mentioned that ﬁnger-pointing and
pinch-tap as a tool for basic manipulation ‘feels’ natural however compromises on
accuracy that is needed for more complex manoeuvres. While there were visible
assembly guidance prompts, participants suggested that more guidance is needed
when conducting an assembly in a mixed environment. While collision exists in
real life, other physical information such as assembly tolerance and sub-assembly
information could be useful. Overall, participants mentioned the suitability of the
application for macro-structure assembly planning and highlighted its potential
for visualising and validating possible sub-assembly interactions involved without
the need for physical prototyping.

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Table 2: System Usability Scale Scores (n=7)

No. Question

I think I would like to use this interface frequently

I found the interface unnecessarily complex

I thought the interface was easy to use

I think that I would need the support of a technical person to be
able to use this interface

I found the various functions in this interface were well-integrated 4.57 0.53

I thought there was too much inconsistency in this interface

3.86 0.90

I would imagine that most people would learn to use this interface
very quickly

I found the interface very cumbersome to use.

I felt very conﬁdent using the interface

10

I needed to learn a lot of things before I could get going with
this interface

Usability Score

Mean SD

4.29 0.76

3.86 0.38

4.29 0.49

2.86 1.21

3.71 0.49

4.29 0.49

4.00 0.58

3.57 1.40

56.07 7.89

Mixed Reality for Mechanical Design and Assembly Planning

7

Table 3: Flow State Scale Scores (n=7)

No. Question

Mean SD

6.29 0.76
I was not confused about my objectives
1
6.00 1.15
2
I knew what I had to do each step of the way
5.14 1.57
3 My thoughts/activities ran ﬂuidly and smoothly
5.43 1.40
4
6.43 0.53
5
3.57 1.51
6
4.43 1.72
7
8
5.14 1.21
9 The right thoughts/movements occurred of their own accord 5.71 0.49
5.86 1.21
10 I felt that I had everything under control
6.57 1.13
11 I enjoyed the experience

I had no diﬃculty concentrating
I was totally absorbed in what I was doing
I feel just the right amount of challenge
I felt that I must not make any mistakes
I think that my competence in this area was

Subscale 1: Clear Goals (Qns 1, 2)
Subscale 2: Action-Awareness Merging (Qns 3, 4, 5)
Subscale 3: Challenge Skill Balance (Qns 6, 7, 8)
Subscale 4: Sense of Control (Qns 9, 10)
Subscale 5: Autotelic Experience (Qn 11)

12.29 1.60
17.00 2.16
13.14 3.34
11.57 1.51
6.57 1.13

5.3 Evaluation Summary

Quantitative results show that while the interface can be initially challenging,
users were eventually able to ﬁnd enjoyment and a sense of control when navi-
gating. For engineering professionals, this could hint at a steeper learning curve
when ﬁrst introduced to concepts that require specialised knowledge in an un-
familiar environment. Qualitative results suggest that engineering professionals
ﬁnd part collisions and superposition of virtual assembly parts within a physical
context as a useful and cost-eﬀective tool for conducting an assembly design re-
view. A further study could be conducted on a larger population of engineering
experts which would yield greater accuracy in understanding the eﬀectiveness of
the application.

6 Conclusion

The developed application is designed to enhance the eﬃciency of mechanical
design engineers when conducting DFMA. MR presents a compelling platform
for testing and visualising complex virtual assembly models and component in-
teractions onto physical space without the need for prototyping. Results from the
preliminary studies reveal that the application is usable and accessible despite
a learning curve. Feedback from design engineers highlights that they foresee a
potential for using MR in improving their DFMA process. Future work could in-
volve exploring a multi-user experience for assembly planning to correlate better
with the nature of assembly planning in a group.

8

Poh et al.

Acknowledgements

The authors of this paper wish to acknowledge the contributions provided by the
technical staﬀ of HelloHolo and Hope Technik Pte Ltd Singapore. This research
was supported by the Singapore Institute of Technology Ignition Grant (R-MOE-
E103-G001).

References

1. Brooke, J.: System usability scale (sus): A quick-and-dirty method of system eval-
uation user information. digital equipment co ltd. Reading, UK pp. 1–7 (1986)
2. Chen, Q., Low, S.E., Yap, J.W., Sim, A.K., Tan, Y.Y., Kwok, B.W., Lee, J.S.,
Tan, C.T., Loh, W.P., Loo, B.L., Wong, A.C.: Immersive virtual reality train-
ing of bioreactor operations. In: 2020 IEEE International Conference on Teach-
ing, Assessment, and Learning for Engineering (TALE). pp. 873–878 (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1109/TALE48869.2020.9368468

3. Csikszentmihalyi, M., Abuhamdeh, S., Nakamura, J., et al.: Flow (1990)
4. Gallegos-Nieto, E., Medell´ın-Castillo, H.I., Gonz´alez-Badillo, G., Lim, T., Ritchie,
J.: The analysis and evaluation of the inﬂuence of haptic-enabled virtual assembly
training on real assembly performance. The International Journal of Advanced
Manufacturing Technology 89(1), 581–598 (2017)

5. Ganier, F., Hoareau, C., Tisseau, J.: Evaluation of procedural learning transfer
from a virtual environment to a real situation: a case study on tank maintenance
training. Ergonomics 57(6), 828–843 (2014)

6. Jayaram, S., Connacher, H.I., Lyons, K.W.: Virtual assembly using virtual reality

techniques. Computer-aided design 29(8), 575–584 (1997)

7. Jayaram, S., Jayaram, U., Wang, Y., Tirumali, H., Lyons, K., Hart, P.: Vade: a
virtual assembly design environment. IEEE computer graphics and applications
19(6), 44–50 (1999)

8. Kim, C.E., Vance, J.M.: Using vps (voxmap pointshell) as the basis for interaction
in a virtual assembly environment. In: International Design Engineering Techni-
cal Conferences and Computers and Information in Engineering Conference. vol.
36991, pp. 1153–1161 (2003)

9. Poh, E., Liong, K., Lee, J.S.A.: Mixed reality interface for load application in ﬁnite
element analysis. In: Meiselwitz, G. (ed.) Social Computing and Social Media: Ex-
perience Design and Social Network Analysis. pp. 470–483. Springer International
Publishing, Cham (2021)

10. Poupyrev, I., Tan, D.S., Billinghurst, M., Kato, H., Regenbrecht, H., Tetsutani,
N.: Tiles: A mixed reality authoring interface. In: Interact. vol. 1, pp. 334–341.
Citeseer (2001)

11. Seth, A., Vance, J.M., Oliver, J.H.: Virtual reality for assembly methods prototyp-

ing: a review. Virtual reality 15(1), 5–20 (2011)

12. Wolfartsberger, J.: Analyzing the potential of virtual reality for engineering design

review. Automation in Construction 104, 27–37 (2019)

13. Zauner, J., Haller, M., Brandl, A., Hartman, W.: Authoring of a mixed reality
assembly instructor for hierarchical structures. In: The Second IEEE and ACM
International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality, 2003. Proceedings.
pp. 237–246. IEEE (2003)

