2
2
0
2

p
e
S
9

]
E
S
.
s
c
[

1
v
6
7
3
4
0
.
9
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Challenges of Implementing Agile Processes in
Remote-First Companies

Lulit Asfaw∗, Mikael Clemmons∗, Cody Hayes∗, Elise Letnaunchyn ∗, Elnaz Rabieinejad†

∗College of Computing and Software Engineering,
Kennesaw State University, Marietta, GA USA
lasfaw@students.kennesaw.edu, mclemmo2@students.kennesaw.edu, chayes86@students.kennesaw.edu,
eletnaun@students.kennesaw.edu,
†Cyber Science Lab, School of Computer Science, University of Guelph, Ontario, Canada
erabiein@uoguelph.ca

Abstract—The trend of remote work, especially in the IT sector, has been on the rise in recent years, and its popularity has especially
increased since the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition to adopting remote work, companies also have been migrating toward managing
their projects using agile processes. Agile processes promote small and continuous feedback loops powered by effective
communication. In this survey, we look to discover the challenges of implementing these processes in a remote setting, speciﬁcally
focusing on the impact on communication. We examine the role communication plays in an agile setting and look for ways to mitigate
the risk remote environments impose on it. Lastly, we present other miscellaneous challenges companies could experience that still
carry dangers but are less impactful overall to agile implementation.

Index Terms—Agile, Remote work, Software Process.

(cid:70)

1 INTRODUCTION

Agile, in the context of software development, is a term
most often related to project management methodologies
that have been cultivated and reﬁned over many years.
The earliest inspirations for agile date back to 1948 and
’The Toyota Way, but it was not until 2001 that the most
commonly accepted principles in agile today were docu-
mented in ”The Manifesto for Software Development” [1].
The manifesto outlined four values and twelve supporting
principles, and it is one of those twelve principles that are
of interest to us when analyzing agile methods in remote
work [2], [3]. The important principle states, ”The most efﬁ-
cient and effective method of conveying information to and
within a development team is face-to-face communication”
[4]. Agile methods look to promote progress through small
iterations and continuous feedback loops, and any lapse of
communication can delay these feedback loops. A transition
to remote work has been a trend, especially within software
development, where many collaborative tools allow devel-
opment teams to conduct their work from anywhere. In this
paper, we ﬁrst clarify some terminology concerning agile
and remote work, followed by a look into the history of
the transition to working remotely. After that, we examine
the agile processes that require effective communication
and then presented why face-to-face communication is the
best communication form to use. Then, we discuss potential
solutions for improving the quality of communication and
ended with other miscellaneous challenges remote work
presents to an agile development process. In addition, the
following section has been dedicated to the hybrid working

role in decreasing remote working problems, and ﬁnally, we
conclude the paper in the last section.

2 TERMINOLOGY
2.1 Key Terms

The term ”agile” is often used in conjunction with other
terms like processes, methodology, project management, etc.
In this paper, when mentioned alone or with different key-
words, we are referring to the style of project management
established in 2001 by seventeen individuals and the twelve
principles they established, collectively referred to as ”The
Agile Manifesto.” The twelve principles are referenced often
within this paper and therefore are listed in Section B below.
It’s hard to express a singular meaning for the term ”agile,”
but as Rick Freedman explains it, ”Agile is an evolutionary
and revolutionary way of thinking for enterprises” [5], [6],
[7]. Therefore, a way to think about the meaning of the
word is that it is a mindset, a collection of principles, and
a set of processes used to manage projects. Agile is often
strongly associated with the IT sector, but it has applications
outside the tech industry. The reasoning for this association
is due to the backgrounds of its founders [8]. The term
”remote” is used for someone working from somewhere
other than a company ofﬁce. This term’s main idea is
that remote teams are not co-located in a physical area
and, therefore, cannot engage in face-to-face communication
[9]. Companies have different approaches to remote work
policies, and thus several terms to describe the nature of
these approaches have been used. In the context of this
paper, when referencing a remote or remote-ﬁrst company,

 
 
 
 
 
 
we are referring to companies that operate in a one hundred
percent remote environment. Other terms you may hear are
hybrid or remote-friendly, and they often refer to a partial
remote/partial in-ofﬁce policy [10]. Hybrid and/or remote-
friendly work policies are outside the scope of this survey.

2.2 Twelve Principles of Agile Software

• Our highest priority is to satisfy the customer
through early and continuous delivery of valuable
software.

• Welcome changing requirements, even late in de-
velopment. Agile processes harness change for the
customer’s competitive advantage.

• Deliver working software frequently, from a couple
of weeks to a couple of months, with a preference to
the shorter timescale.

• Business people and developers must work together

daily throughout the project.

• Build projects around motivated individuals. Give
them the environment and support they need, and
trust them to get the job done.

• The most efﬁcient and effective method of conveying
information to and within a development team is
face-to-face conversation.

• Working software is

the primary measure of

progress.

• Agile processes promote sustainable development.
• The sponsors, developers, and users should be able

to maintain a constant pace indeﬁnitely.

• Continuous attention to technical excellence and

•

good design enhances agility.
Simplicity–the art of maximizing the amount of work
not done–is essential.

• The best architectures, requirements, and designs

emerge from self-organizing teams.

• At regular intervals, the team reﬂects on how to
become more effective, then tunes and adjusts its
behavior accordingly

3 HISTORY OF REMOTE WORK

Some of the very ﬁrst work-from-home gestures began
around 1970. This was mainly due to inﬂation in the oil
embargo industry. Because prices rose and fuel became so
expensive, the cost was not feasible; at this time, remote
work made a minimal but groundbreaking introduction to
ofﬁce work. In 1997 Google launched the powerful Google
Search Engine, which is used globally today. A few years
later, project management tools were developed and re-
leased to help team members communicate effectively. Next,
the most signiﬁcant technological transformation was the
widespread adoption and access to broadband internet. This
was historically the second largest stride towards remote
work due to the introduction of programs and engines to
make it more feasible [11]. Although these strides might
not be consistently recognized as the initial steps to create
the possibility of remote work, without the invention and
implementation of the previously mentioned inventions,
the operations of remote-ﬁrst development teams would
be very different. The consistent and speedy development

2

of innovative and groundbreaking technology made many
in information and technology-based roles realize that the
tools they were working on allowed for more workplace
ﬂexibility and remote work [12], [13]. Fast forward about
ﬁfteen years of a slow increase in remote work, and the
globe experiences the largest modern-day pandemic, Sars-
CoV-2 [2019]. The effect that Sars-CoV-2 had globally altered
relationships, workplaces, the economy, mental health, and
farming. Although those are just a few things the pandemic
has changed, the world of remote work became a reality
in a more consistent capacity. It is fair to state that remote
work became popular directly because of the pandemic and
social distancing measures; however, many more factors like
technology innovation and economic decline played a vital
part in the rapid growth in adoption. With the combination
of technology innovation and social distancing mandates
critical for mitigating the healthcare system, remote work
was needed and mandatory in many companies like Twitter,
Google, and others [14]. Although 2022 still has not seen an
ofﬁcial end of the Sars-CoV-2 virus life, remote work has
been combined with ofﬁce work to create a friendly environ-
ment to ensure success. The impact of all the events dating
back to 1970, especially the recent global pandemic, has
revolutionized remote working, most prominently among
technology and information workers.

4 AGILE AND COMMUNICATION

Agile software development emphasizes the importance of
communication between the software development team
and the project stakeholders as well as within the project
team [4], [15]. According to a research study that aimed
to explore the challenges faced by software development
teams, many difﬁculties in software engineering are claimed
to be solved by agile software development approaches
[16]. Some challenges include extended development peri-
ods, more considerable costs than expected, and unfulﬁlled
project requirements. Members of software development
teams should ideally have rich interactions and have the
opportunity to collaborate and have frequent face-to-face
meetings. According to the study, employees in different
locations are less likely to see themselves as part of the
same team. That face-to-face interaction is vital for success-
ful team collaboration [16]. Face-to-face interactions are in-
tended to help people get to know one another and build so-
cial networks that can foster trust, respect, and commitment
and facilitate long-term development work across many ge-
ographic locations. With today’s technical advancements al-
lowing seamless remote meetings, it isn’t easy to understand
why face-to-face communication remains so popular. Be-
cause not all team members or stakeholders may be present
in the same place simultaneously, electronic communication
tools are frequently used in agile projects. However, face-
to-face communication provides a certain level of clarity
that cannot be achieved through online communication.
Face-to-face communication facilitates quick feedback loops
and enhances nonverbal communication when employees
interact with one another. It strengthens bonds, fosters
mutual trust, and establishes centers of inﬂuence within a
company [1]. Face-to-face interaction is especially preferred
in collaborative work, where more critical tasks such as

daily stand-up and discovery sessions are considered. A
daily stand-up is an essential aspect of the agile process
since it improves team communication. Integrating good
communication with face-to-face interaction as part of a
team’s culture aids in developing a more Agile workplace
[1]. The team breaks down the project idea into tangible re-
quirements in a discovery session. Any miscommunication
or misunderstanding during this process can have a dev-
astating impact. Face-to-face communication takes less time
and effort and has several dimensions via which meaning
can be better conveyed, making it an ideal choice for most
Agile processes.

Face-to-face communication plays a signiﬁcant role in fa-
cilitating collaboration among team members from different
cultural backgrounds. Teams are made up of people from
different cultures and backgrounds. Cultural differences
are key for a successful team because each team member
can approach the problem from a different perspective
and offer suggestions based on their unique background.
However, cultural differences can also lead to conﬂicts and,
consequently, project failures [1]. According to Hofstede’s
cultural dimensions theory, cross-cultural communication
is prone to misinterpretation because people from differ-
ent cultural backgrounds could understand identical ver-
bal and nonverbal messages differently [17]. Face-to-face
communication fosters cultural understanding by creating
a trusting environment. It is thus less likely for messages to
be misinterpreted. Communication is already a challenge in
cross-cultural teams, and using online communication tools
that do not accurately display non-verbal cues and body
language can further accentuate communication issues. Cul-
tural differences can be a barrier to communication, affect-
ing one’s capacity to connect with others and drive them.
The Six Dimensions of Culture, developed by Hofstede, can
be used to understand and work effectively with people
from other cultures. It can also be used to assemble a high-
performing team from individuals with diverse cultural
and geographic backgrounds. Hofstede’s Six Dimensions
of Culture include Power Distance Index, Individualism
vs. Collectivism, Masculinity vs. Femininity, Uncertainty
Avoidance Index, Long- Versus Short-Term Orientation, and
Indulgence vs. Restraint as seen in ”Fig. 1” [17]. Culture
clashes can severely affect the work environment and work-
ﬂow. It is essential to understand the cultural values of each
team member to understand the importance of face-to-face
communication further.

HOW TO IMPROVE COMMUNICATION

5
QUALITY

Focusing on improved communication quality through a
communication plan begins with understanding what asyn-
chronous and synchronous forms of communication are
and how each can be utilized to beneﬁt the remote teams
[18]. Synchronous communications are when team members
communicate with each other in real-time. Examples of this
communication include conference calls, instant messaging,
or Teams/Zoom meetings. Face-to-face communications in
the ofﬁce, even if the conversation is in passing, would also
be synchronous. On the other hand, asynchronous commu-
nications allow team members to respond when each mem-

3

Fig. 1. Hofstede’s Six Dimensions of Culture

ber’s schedule permits, such as emails, group chats, or even
voice mails and messages. Although synchronous commu-
nication is crucial in many agile processes, whenever it is
not required, asynchronous communication is the best way
for team members and other stakeholders within remote
teams to interact [18]. This approach provides ﬂexibility for
team members across different time zones, allows for team
members to stay focused on their tasks at hand, reduces
the stress of responding to work communications outside
of their working hours, and also allows for team members
to think through problems and ideas, in turn reducing
impulse responses. Furthermore, without face-to-face com-
munication, team members can miss contextual clues given
by body language and other nonverbal, visible cues, so
keeping messages as clear and to the point as possible is
good practice also. Even incorporating the use of emojis
can give more precise context. For employers, avoiding
micromanaging is imperative for remote teams to succeed,
which is one of the main reasons Agile is so effective. Team
members feel more responsible and motivated to perform
their work without worrying about micromanaging; think
back to the Agile principle about trusting the employees
to do their job [19]. Having the right tools in place, such
as project management software, video calling, or even a
virtual “break room” where team members can make small
talk, all help to emulate better being in an ofﬁce and help
team members feel more connected and motivated [20].

6 OTHER CHALLENGES IN AGILE/REMOTE
WORK
Being remote can also directly challenge or strain Agile’s
core values. As a core value, “Individuals and Interactions
over processes and tools” emphasizes the importance of
direct collaboration, especially in those activities best suited
for face-to-face interaction [4]. While having processes and
tools in place provides teams the ability to be Agile, the
focus is still on having motivated people working together
effectively as a team to deliver value to the customer.
However, in a remote team, processes and tools play a
more signiﬁcant role in allowing the team to collaborate and
effectively provide the same expected value. Additionally,
remote ﬁrst companies and their teams may ﬁnd difﬁculty

in adhering to the Agile principle of “Build projects around
motivated individuals. Give them the environment and
support the need and trust them to get the job done.” [1].
This applies more to the company because motivated teams
will produce more, higher quality work [21]. If the employer
treats employees like drones who cannot be trusted to
perform their jobs, employees will eventually act like drones
who cannot be trusted to perform their jobs. And it’s here
where the employer and the remote teams can struggle to
ﬁnd the balance to allow the team to stay motivated and be
successful, as monitoring activity and over-communicating
to keep remote teams on task can lead to micromanaging
and subsequently demotivating the teams to perform. With
over-communicating having potential downstream negative
impacts on the remote teams as the aforementioned more
desirable face-to-face communications are not able to be had
for Agile processes that typically require such, having an
effective communication plan for the teams is now more
essential. In an ofﬁce environment, face-to-face communica-
tion is much more accessible and likely to happen naturally
outside of scheduled meetings just by proximity [20]. In
remote teams, team members may not even be in the same
time zones, so even more typical communication methods
such as phone calls or video chats can be challenging to
coordinate. Also, with many remote team members working
from home ofﬁces, without a clear delineation of the work
environment from the home environment, communications
can become less professional and more casual, blurring the
work-life boundaries, which can lead to other stressors.
Moreover, getting back to the tools utilized by remote
teams, team members may have technical limitations due
to poor internet connectivity and availability, in addition
to the equipment they may use for work. And some forms
of communication can even lead to friction amongst team
members due to misinterpreting context in emails or other
messages.

7 HYBRID WORKING; ONE STEP AHEAD OF THE
REMOTE WORKING

In the post-pandemic age and with revolution, It is doubtful
that companies will return to an utterly face-to-face working
method. Remote working has many advantages for both
employees and employers [22]. For instance, employers can
hire experts regardless of geographical boundaries. Also,
employees can work without spending extra energy and
money on daily commutes. However, as mentioned ear-
lier, remote working challenges and face-to-face commu-
nication’s importance for improving performance is not
neglectable.

Hybrid working can be a critical key and allow com-
panies to use both remote and face-to-face working advan-
tages. Hybrid working gives employees the right to work
in the ofﬁce or remotely [22]. In fact, this method tries to
satisfy different employees’ preferences. Furthermore, some
employees prefer to collaborate with team members in-
person or, due to some technical difﬁculties, don’t have
enough performance remotely, can work in-ofﬁce. Although
Hybrid working can decrease remote working problems, it
has some challenges that must be considered . As long as
the working space has been split into ofﬁce and virtual, it is

4

essential that both groups feel equal [23]. In other words,
remote or ofﬁce employees should have equal rights in
participation, representing their ideas, etc. In this way, IT
leaders should provide some facilities for remote employees
to feel comfortable such as rearranging chairs and tables
around cameras and microphones during meetings, improv-
ing sound systems, providing the necessary equipment for
remote employees, and setting some in-person meetings for
all employees to talk about their problems [24].If a company
could make these minor changes can turn their company
into a ﬂexible and effective environment that can use Agile
methodology in the best way.

8 CONCLUSION

In conclusion, a combination of Agile project management
and remote work has become more popular, especially in
the IT sector, but for different reasons. Agile solves many de-
velopment problems introduced by the traditional waterfall
model but is highly dependent on effective communication.
Remote work has been made possible by advancements in
technology that allow collaboration amongst project teams
located worldwide. Still, its adoption has been inﬂuenced
in recent years due to the COVID-19 pandemic [25]. This
pandemic has led more companies to adopt ”remote-ﬁrst”
policies that allow, and even further, expect their employees
to work from somewhere other than a company ofﬁce. In
co-located teams, communication is more accessible and
often happens naturally due to the proximity of team mem-
bers. In remote teams, new risks are introduced in remote
environments and, if not handled properly, can disrupt
previously successful Agile implementations. As previously
mentioned, effective communication is essential to the suc-
cess of Agile implementations. As stated in the guiding
principles of ”The Agile Manifesto,” face-to-face communi-
cation is the most effective form of communication. Agile’s
success depends on short, continuous feedback loops that
deliver feedback to development teams and allow for incre-
mental development cycles. Therefore, poor communication
can impose delays that interrupt these crucial feedback
loops. In remote-ﬁrst companies, where accurate face-to-
face communication is impossible, knowledge of the risks
to communication is key in mitigating them. Many agile
processes greatly beneﬁt from in-person communication,
where body language and other visual cues are supple-
mental methods of conveying ideas. Cultural differences
can signiﬁcantly impact communication, and remote teams
naturally promote more culturally diverse teams. Face-to-
face communication lessens misinterpretations of cultural
differences, which again is not possible in remote teams.
Lastly, there are many things remote-ﬁrst companies can do
to promote effective communication within remote teams.
Still, even with that, they may face other potential issues in
remote agile teams. Other fundamental principles of Agile
state that success depends on motivated team members, and
lack of human interaction can often cause mental distress. It
is crucial to the success of Agile that companies provide
an environment that fosters communication and encourages
its employees. With the correct measures, Agile can still be
successful in a new, remote-ﬁrst world.

5

[23] P. B. Hirsch, “Sustaining corporate culture in a world of hybrid

work,” Journal of Business Strategy, 2021.

[24] P. Will, “Hybrid working may change our workplace social net-
works. what does it mean for inclusion?” LSE Business Review,
2021.

[25] O. Shahid, M. Nasajpour, S. Pouriyeh, R. M. Parizi, M. Han,
M. Valero, F. Li, M. Aledhari, and Q. Z. Sheng, “Machine learning
research towards combating covid-19: Virus detection, spread pre-
vention, and medical assistance,” Journal of Biomedical Informatics,
vol. 117, p. 103751, 2021.

REFERENCES

[1] P. Measy, Agile Foundations: Principles, Practices and Framework.

BCS Learning & Development, 2015.

[2] A. Yazdinejad, S. Kavei, and S. Razaghi Karizno, “Increasing the
performance of reactive routing protocol using the load balanc-
ing and congestion control mechanism in manet,” Computer and
Knowledge Engineering, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 33–42, 2019.

[3] A. Yazdinejad, R. M. Parizi, G. Srivastava, A. Dehghantanha, and
K.-K. R. Choo, “Energy efﬁcient decentralized authentication in
internet of underwater things using blockchain,” in 2019 IEEE
Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–6.

[4] K. Beck, M. Beedle, A. Van Bennekum, A. Cockburn, W. Cunning-
ham, M. Fowler, J. Grenning, J. Highsmith, A. Hunt, R. Jeffries
et al., “Manifesto for agile software development,” 2001.

[5] M. A. S´anchez, “A framework to assess organizational readiness
for the digital transformation,” Dimensi´on Empresarial, vol. 15,
no. 2, pp. 27–40, 2017.

[6] R. M. Parizi, T. J. Gandomani, and M. Z. Nafchi, “Hidden facili-
tators of agile transition: Agile coaches and agile champions,” in
2014 8th. Malaysian Software Engineering Conference (MySEC), 2014,
pp. 246–250.

[7] T. Javdani Gandomani, H. Zulzalil, A. A. Abdul Ghani, A. B.
Md. Sultan, and R. Meimandi Parizi, “The impact of inade-
quate and dysfunctional training on agile transformation process:
A grounded theory study,” Information and Software Technology,
vol. 57, pp. 295–309, 2015.

[8] B. Sweeney and C. Business, Lean QuickStart Guide: The Simpliﬁed

Beginner’s Guide to Lean. ClydeBank Media LLC, 2017.

[9] E. Rabieinejad, A. Yazdinejad, A. Dehghantanha, R. M. Parizi, and
G. Srivastava, “Secure ai and blockchain-enabled framework in
smart vehicular networks,” in 2021 IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC
Wkshps).

IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–6.

[10] D. C. Wyld, “The black swan of the coronavirus and how american
organizations have adapted to the new world of remote work,”
European Journal of Business and Management Research, vol. 7, no. 1,
pp. 9–19, 2022.

[11] A. Karthick, “Work from home–analysis of satisfaction levels

across various work sectors,” 2020.

[12] A. Yazdinejad, R. M. Parizi, A. Dehghantanha, and K.-K. R. Choo,
“Blockchain-enabled authentication handover with efﬁcient pri-
vacy protection in sdn-based 5g networks,” IEEE Transactions on
Network Science and Engineering, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 1120–1132, 2019.
[13] N. Bloom, J. Liang, J. Roberts, and Z. J. Ying, “Does working from
home work? evidence from a chinese experiment,” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, vol. 130, no. 1, pp. 165–218, 2015.

[14] P. R. Choudhury, “Our work-from-anywhere future,” Defense AR

Journal, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 350–350, 2021.

[15] A. Yazdinejad, A. Dehghantanha, R. M. Parizi, M. Hammoudeh,
H. Karimipour, and G. Srivastava, “Block hunter: Federated learn-
ing for cyber threat hunting in blockchain-based iiot networks,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.09829, 2022.

[16] H. Holmstrom, E.

´O. Conch ´uir, J. Agerfalk, and B. Fitzgerald,
“Global software development challenges: A case study on tem-
poral, geographical and socio-cultural distance,” in 2006 IEEE
International Conference on Global Software Engineering (ICGSE’06).
IEEE, 2006, pp. 3–11.

[17] G. Hofstede, G. J. Hofstede, and M. Minkov, “Cultures and organi-
zations: Software of the mind. revised and expanded 3rd edition,”
N.-Y.: McGraw-Hill, p. 560, 2010.

[18] M. M. Islam, M. T. Hasan, and A. Sultana, “Remote ofﬁce man-
agement: A study on preparation and system development for
developing country.”

[19] A. Yazdinejad, R. M. Parizi, A. Dehghantanha, and H. Karimipour,
“Federated learning for drone authentication,” Ad Hoc Networks,
vol. 120, p. 102574, 2021.

[20] L. A. Zaina, H. Sharp, and L. Barroca, “Ux information in the
daily work of an agile team: A distributed cognition analysis,”
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, vol. 147, p. 102574,
2021.

[21] E. Rabieinejad, A. Yazdinejad, T. Hasani, R. M. Parizi, and
M. Hammoudeh, “An efﬁcient deﬁ-based data warehousing ap-
proach in supply chain ﬁnance,” in The 5th International Conference
on Future Networks & Distributed Systems, 2021, pp. 177–185.
[22] N. Bloom, R. Han, and J. Liang, “How hybrid working from home
works out,” National Bureau of Economic Research, Tech. Rep.,
2022.

