International Journal of Wireless & Mobile Networks (IJWMN), Vol.14, No.4, August 2022 

PROTOTYPING A SERIAL NUMBER BASED 
AUTHENTICATION MODEL FOR A COMPUTER IN A 
WIRELESS LOCAL AREA NETWORK 

John C. Chebor, Simon M. Karume, Nelson B. Masese and Andrew Kipkebut 

Kabarak University, School of Science, Engineering and Technology, Nakuru, Kenya 

ABSTRACT 

With  the  increase  of  wireless  LAN  usage  in  homes  and  enterprises  due  to  its  numerous  benefits, 
authenticating  the  ever  increasing  number  of  devices  and  their  users  has  become  a  challenge  to 
proprietors of such kind networks. A MAC address, a physical network address that is used as basis for this 
study, has a copy of its value in the system software that can be spoofed and altered rendering the address 
not unique, not secure and unreliable.   On the contrary, a computer’s serial number is hard-coded in the 
system hardware only and therefore cannot be spoofed and altered making it unique, secure and reliable.  
The  research,  therefore,  was  aimed  at  designing  a  model  that  demonstrates  how  a  computer’s  serial 
number can  be used for authenticating a computer in a wireless local area network.  In order to achieve 
the  research  objective,  the  study  examined  the  inbuilt  access  and  use  of  a  computer’s  serial  number 
prototype model as an alternative method of authenticating devices in a network.  Design science research 
methodology that involved design and development, demonstration and model evaluation was employed.  A 
Serial Number Based Authentication prototype (SNAP) was therefore designed using state chart and flow 
chart diagrams based on dynamic programming, developed over evolutionary prototyping and test run on 
a static experimental design using Java Development Kit and MySQL platforms to demonstrate, as proof of 
concept, that a computer’s serial number can be used to authenticate a computer in a  wireless local area 
network. From the test runs whose outcomes were the binary values yes or no, it was found out that SNAP 
can  actually  allow  or  deny,  enable  or  disable  a  computer  in  a  network  based  on  the  computer’s  serial 
number.  The researcher therefore, recommends that the prototype be scaled up, then adopted as a network 
device authentication method 

KEYWORDS 

Computer’s Serial Number, Authentication, Wireless LAN, Serial Number-Based Authentication  

1. INTRODUCTION 

Wireless LANs (WLAN) also known as Wireless Fidelity (Wi-Fi) or 802.11 standards is a type 
of a local area network that allows users access network services using mobile devices (wireless 
stations)  such  as  laptops,  personal  digital  assistants,  smart  watches  and  even  smartphones 
(Dordal, 2018).  The wireless stations use a base station usually an access point (AP) or a hotspot 
as an entry point to the network services (Romanov & Succi, 2018).  Unlike wired LANs that use 
cables  or  wires  as  transmission  media,  WLANs  uses  radio  wave  frequencies  to  transmit 
information over the local area network. 

WLAN, therefore, comes with a myriad number of benefits as compared to wired LANs, notably, 
mobility,  rapid  deployment,  reduction  in  infrastructure  and  operational  costs,  flexibility,  and 
scalability  (DHS,  2017  and  Wallace,  2018).    Due  to  these  benefits,  hotspots  are  now  virtually 
found  everywhere;  in  enterprises,  at  homes,  and  in  public  places.    Wireless  devices  such  as 

DOI:10.5121/ijwmn.2022.14403                                                                                                                   27 

 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Wireless & Mobile Networks (IJWMN), Vol.14, No.4, August 2022 

laptops, personal digital assistants and even smartphones come with Wi-Fi features integrated in 
them.    Despite  the  numerous  benefits  that  come  with  wireless  LANs,  network  insecurity  has 
become a thorn in the flesh for proprietors of  such kind of networks.   Singh & Sharma, (2017), 
points  out  that  an  attacker  simply  needs  to  be  within  the  range  of  the  WLAN  access  point  to 
intrude into the network as opposed to wired LANs where an attacker requires physical access to 
the  LAN  or  remotely  use  porous  firewall  systems  to  gain  access  to  the  LAN.    WLANs  are 
therefore easily targeted by attackers through spoofing, denial of service, eavesdropping, man-in-
the-middle, masquerading, message modification, message replay and traffic analysis (Stallings, 
2011;  Poremba,  2017;  DHS,  2017).  Wallace,  (2018),  describes  the  reasons  for  the  threats  as 
default configurations, network architecture nature, encryption weaknesses, and physical security. 

The  numerous  benefits  that  come  with  WLAN  have  made  enterprises  to  adopt  bring  your  own 
device (BYOD) concept to allow employees use their own devices (Poremba, 2017).  Apart from 
the  employees  accessing  and  using  enterprise  networks,  another  group  of  stake  holders  such  as 
visitors,  vendors,  and  contractors  at  one  point,  if  not  all,  can  as  well  require  network  usage  as 
they carry on their businesses  with the enterprise.  Rise in internet of things (IOT) devices such 
smart devices,  smart  watches  and  smart  phones,  as  well,  further complicates  WLAN  challenges 
equation (Pierce, 2021; Elkhodr & Mufti, 2019; Elkhodr et al. 2016). Allowing users to connect 
to the network with their own devices can pause as a security challenge as it becomes difficult for 
network  administrators  to  control  such  kind  of  a  network  access  and  usage.    It  is  therefore 
imperative  that  network  administrators  use  network  access  control  tools  to  control  who  should 
and who should not access the network. One of such kind of a control tool is the network access 
control (NAC) (Robb, 2022; Pierce, 2021; & Chiradeep, 2021).  NAC constitutes identification, 
authentication,  authorization,  and  accounting  (IAAA)  according  to  Lawson,  (2017)  as  the 
essential functions in providing the required services in a network.   

Major authentication methods or technologies began way back during the Second World War by 
the  use  of  identification  of  a  friend  or  a  foe  (IFF)  (Lehtonen  et  al.,  2008).    From  then  on, 
advances  in  authentication  techniques  that  include  password,  smart  card,  biometric,  certificate 
MAC  address,  IP  address  and  multi-factor  (MFA)  based  authentication  methods  took  effect 
(Shacklett, 2021; Johnson, 2021 and Fredriksson, 2017).  The methods are categorized based on 
what  one is  known  for  or  knowledge  based  (password, PIN),  what  one  has  or  possesses  (token, 
certificate),  who  one  is  or  inheritance  (biometrics),  where  one  is  or  location  based  or  address 
based  (MAC  address,  IP  address)  and  when  one  is  authenticating  or  time  factor  as  well 
(Shacklett,  2021).    Out  of  all  the  mentioned  authentication  methods,  MAC  address,  IP  address 
and at times certificates are machine based authentication methods (Fredriksson, 2017). A MAC 
address, a physical network address that is used as basis for this study, has a copy of its value in 
the system software that can be spoofed and altered rendering the address not unique, not secure 
and unreliable, making it not suitable for authentication. A computer’s serial number, in contrast, 
is only hard-coded on the hardware without a copy in the system software alone renders it hard to 
be spoofed (Derekyoung, 2017). 

This  research,  therefore,  was  aimed  at  designing  a  model  that  demonstrates  how  a  computer’s 
serial number can be used for authenticating a computer in a wireless local area network through 
answers  to  the  research  questions:  (i)  How  can  an  algorithm  that  can  obtain  and  use  a  remote 
computer’s  serial  number  in a  wireless  LAN  be developed?  (ii)  How  can a  model that  uses  the 
computer’s serial number to authenticate the computer in a wireless LAN be designed? (ii) How 
can the model that uses the computer’s serial number to authenticate the computer in a wireless 
LAN  be  demonstrated?  (iv)  How  can  the  model  that  uses  the  computer’s  serial  number  to 
authenticate  the  computer  in  a  wireless  LAN  be  evaluated?  The  paper  was  then  structured  as 
follows:  Section 1 provides background information and study motivation.  Section 2 deals with 
related  work.   Section  3  presents  the design, development, demonstration  and  evaluation  of  the 

28 

 
  
 
International Journal of Wireless & Mobile Networks (IJWMN), Vol.14, No.4, August 2022 

prototype  perceived  to  address  the  study  questions  listed.    Section  4  presents  the  conclusion 
derived from the study 

2. RELATED WORK 

As a subset of location-based authentication, IP address authentication is a traditional method of 
authenticating  computers  that  require  network  and  resource  access.    Once  a  user  logs  onto  a 
network, IP address authentication checks on their IP address and validates them against a list of 
allowed  IPs  or  IP  ranges.    When  a  range  of  addresses  is  specified,  the  access  point  performs  a 
logical and with the IP address entered in the IP address filter and the configured subnet.  If an 
exact  IP  address  is  specified,  the  authentication  method  specifies  a  subnet  mask  so  that  only 
request  from  a  client  IP address  is  allowed  or  blocked, depending  on  what  is  configured  in the 
filter  (Servicenow,  2022).  This  eliminates  or  reduces  the  use  of  user  IDs  and  passwords,  initial 
configuration and maintenance is simple, works well with static IPs, however, requires a separate 
remote authentication tool, and slow for dynamic IPs, (EBSCO, 2022). But with dynamic nature 
of  networks,  that  is,  users  and  devices  are  mobile,  plus  users  can  use  multiple  devices  from 
different locations,  thus  IPs  might  not  correspond  to  their  institutions.    Although virtual  private 
networks and proxy services have been fronted to remedy the drawback, they are complicated to 
manage  have  their  own  issues  (Hoy,  2019).  IP  address  range  makes  it  easy  to  be  spoofed, 
dynamic  IP  address  allocation  results  to  multiple  users  using  the  same  IP,  and  the  IP  address 
keeps changing for the same device from location to location (Chad, 2017).  

MAC  address  authentication,  on  the  other  hand,  a  port-based  authentication  method,  allows  or 
denies  network  access  based  on  the  MAC  address  credentials  for  machines  such  as  IP  phones, 
printers,  and  network  attached  storage  devices.  As  a  layer  2  OSI  reference  model  issue,  MAC 
address  authentication  solution  uses RADIUS  over  IEEE802.1x  framework  rather  than  EAP 
(Cisco,  2018;  Fredrisson,  2017).  When  a  device  connects  to  an  access  point  (AP),  the  AP 
forwards  the  MAC  address  as  the log  in credential  to the  RADIUS  server.  With  MAC-based 
authentication, the MAC  address  serves  as  both  the  username  and  the  password.  The  RADIUS 
server  consults  the  authentication  server  and  sends  back  a  RADIUS  return  attribute  based  on 
authentication results 

MAC address filtering, also referred to as address control or address reservation, or  still wireless 
MAC authentication  allows  or  blocks traffic  from  a  known  machine  or  device  depending  on an 
organizational security policy to secure their networks (Andysah, 2017).  However, due to a copy 
of a MAC address value in the system software (Cardenas, 2003), MAC addresses can be spoofed 
(Lee, 2010) and can  be altered  (Apple,  2011).   Additionally, MAC  addresses  are  not  encrypted 
(Gill  &  Dahiya,  2017),  it  is  not  recommended  for  large  wireless  networks  (Singh  &  Sharma, 
2015;  Watanabe  et  al,  2013)  and  furthermore,  Kurose  &  Ross,  (2013),  raises  the  issue  that  a 
device can  be attached to  multiple  networks  each  with a  corresponding MAC  address  interface.  
A  device,  for  instance  can  be  attached to  an  Ethernet  port,  a  Wi-Fi,  or  a  Bluetooth  port,  all  of 
which  cannot  uniquely identify  the  device.    A MAC address  in  a  nutshell,  is  not  unique, is  not 
secure and unreliable as required characteristics for identifiers (Developer, 2022) 

3.  SERIAL NUMBER BASED AUTHENTICATION PROTOTYPE  

The  serial  number  based  authentication  prototype  (SNAP)  that  was  perceived  to  address  the 
challenges of using MAC address authentication, for authenticating computers in a network.  The 
model  was  designed,  developed,  demonstrated  and  evaluated  based  on  design  science  research 
(DSR) as follows 

29 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Wireless & Mobile Networks (IJWMN), Vol.14, No.4, August 2022 

3.1. Design and Development 

As  earlier  stated,  the  ultimate  goal  of the  study  was  to  design  a  model that demonstrates  how  a 
computer’s  serial  number,  as  an  identifier,  can  be  used  to  authenticate  a  computer  in  wireless 
LAN.  As  such,  authentication  details  that  included  the  serial  number,  the  IP  address  and  the 
computer’s name had to eventually be displayed on a display interface for further manipulation or 
be  controlled if  need arises.    To  achieve  this  ultimate  goal,  the  SNAP  model  was  designed  and 
developed to first, registers computers so that it can later be used as a yard stick to either allow or 
deny computers  access  to  the  network.   Then  upon  executing the  application, it deletes existing 
authentication details in order to pave way for newly logged on computers’ authentication details. 
This  is  followed  by  system  collecting  IP  addresses,  computer  names,  and  computers’  serial 
numbers for all computers that log on to the network.  The authentication details are then collated 
for  the  purpose  of  validating  them,  as  a  unit,  based  on  their  registration  status.    Registered 
computers  are  allowed  access  to  the  network  and  unregistered  computers  are  denied  network 
access.    Once  they  are  allowed  network  access,  valid  computer  authentication  details  are 
displayed  on  a  Connected  Devices  display  interface.    Apart  from  containing  computer’s  Serial 
Number, computer’s Name and computer’s Ip Address, the Connected Devices display interface 
contains an additional Status column to allow the validly logged on computers to be controlled if 
need arises.  All the fundamental components, their details and relationships are illustrated in the 
figure 1 below 

Figure 1.  General model for a serial number based authentication system 

A dynamic programming design was adopted during the algorithm design development phase of 
the study due to the fact that a dynamic programming algorithm optimizes solutions on a step by 
step  basis  recursively  to  the  whole  (SmartDraw,  2018;  Visual-paradigm,  2018;  Paramalways, 
2009).    In  other  words,  the  results  of  one  step  solve  the  problem  of  another  consecutive  step 
recursively.  The  algorithm  with  a  corresponding  flow  chart  (figure  2)  that  depicts  the  system 
description is as follows: 

1.  Start  
2.  Register computers 

30 

 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Wireless & Mobile Networks (IJWMN), Vol.14, No.4, August 2022 

3.  Delete existing connected computers details  
4.  Get connected computer details 
4.1  Get the computer name 
4.2  Get computer raw IP address 
4.3  Get computer serial number  
4.4  Collate computer IP address, name and serial number 

5.  If computer is registered  

5.1  Allow computer connect to the network 
5.2  Post Connected Computer Details to the Database 
5.3  Retrieve and Display the Connected Computer Details from Database 
5.4  Control validly allowed computers 

6.  Else, deny computer network access 
7.  End 

Figure 2. General flow chart for SNAM system 

31 

 
 
 
International Journal of Wireless & Mobile Networks (IJWMN), Vol.14, No.4, August 2022 

3.2. Demonstration 

In  order  to  demonstrate  the  proof  of  concept  that  a  computer’s  serial  number  can  be  used  to 
authenticate  a  computer  in  a  wireless  LAN,  the  SNAP  model  was  implemented  using  MySQL 
database and Java’s IDE tools over evolutionary prototyping using a static group comparison pre-
experimental  design  set  up.  The  set  contained  authentication  server,  authentication  details 
database, an access point, two clients, the SNAP application and their connections as depicted in 
figure 3 below.   

Figure 3:  The SNAP system components 

While  the  authentication  server  was  installed  with  the  SNAP  application  to  perform 
authentication  processing  with  whose  details  are  stored  and  managed  in  the  authentication 
database, the access point acted as a link between the clients and the server just as the case in a 
client-server  architecture.    Two  clients  were  part  of  the  set  up  so  that  one  was  configured  for 
valid and the other for invalid expected outcomes. Apart from the need of using proof of concept 
(PoC) to prove the overall concept that a computer’s serial number can be used to authenticate a 
computer in a wireless LAN, the set up as well was geared towards using PoC to prove that other 
modules  of  prototype  that  culminates  to  the  overall  concept,  can  as  well  be  executed.  PoC 
according  to  Leurs&  Duggan,  (2018)  and  MacPherson,  (2018)  is  an  exercise  to  test  design  or 
assumption ideas.  The other concepts of the study, that correspond to the system modules, and 
required PoC were that;  

1.  A  computer’s  authentication  details  (that  is  name,  IP  address  and  Serial  number)  can  be 

collected 

2.  A registered computer can access a network 
3.  An unregistered computer cannot access a network  
4.  An  already  logged  on  or  an  allowed  computer  can  be  denied  access  to  the  network  if  a 

need arises 

To  begin  with,  four  computers  were  registered  as  displayed  in  the  Registered  Devices 
interface shown the figure 4 below 

32 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Wireless & Mobile Networks (IJWMN), Vol.14, No.4, August 2022 

Figure 4. Computers that are already registered in the system 

During the demonstration, three computers, KOLSOLT (unregistered client), RAFIKI (registered 
client) and DOTTHEDUCK (server) were connected. On test running the SNAP application, only 
RAFIKI  and DOTTHEDUCK  computers  were  allowed access  while  the  unregistered  KOLSOLT 
computer was denied network access as illustrated by the disabled state of the Status column 
on the Connected Devices display diagram in the figure 5 below 

Figure 5.  Blocked unregistered KOLSOLT computer 

33 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Wireless & Mobile Networks (IJWMN), Vol.14, No.4, August 2022 

The  Wi-Fi  interface  status  for  the  KOLSOLT  was  equally  disabled  as  indicated  in  the  figure  6 
below 

Network services 
denied 

Figure 6.  Blocked unregistered KOLSOLT computer Wi-Fi interface status 

But  once KOLSOLT  was  registered and  the  SNAP application executed  once again,  KOLSOLT 
was allowed network access together with other two registered computers as shown in the figure 
7 below 

Figure 7.  KOLSOLT allowed access after registration 

The  other  aspect  of  the  prototype  was  to  develop  and  test  run  a  section  that  controls  validly 
allowed computers if need arises, while allowing other computers to continually use the network.  
This was achieved by first clicking on the desired client (e.g RAFIKI client computer in this case) 
on the Connected Devices interface on figure 7 above.    

The system prompts on the surety to disable the client from accessing the network figure 8 

34 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Wireless & Mobile Networks (IJWMN), Vol.14, No.4, August 2022 

Figure 8. Denying RAFIKI computer network access prompt message 

On clicking YES button, the RAFIKI client is successfully denied network access as illustrated in 
system prompt in figure 9 below.  

Figure 9. Denying RAFIKI computer network access confirmation message 

The confirmation that RAFIKI client has been disabled, therefore, cannot access the network is 
illustrated in a screen shot in figure 10 below  

Figure 10. Denied RAFIKI computer network access 

The  client  Wi-Fi  interface  status  as  well  indicates  that  the  client  cannot  access  the  network  as 
shown in the figure 11 below 

35 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Wireless & Mobile Networks (IJWMN), Vol.14, No.4, August 2022 

Figure 11. Blocked network denied KOLSOLT computer Wi-Fi interface status 

A  summary  of  the  test  runs  on  whether  the  prototype can  or  cannot  register  computers,  collect 
computers  authentication  details,  allow  or  deny  a  computers  network  access  based  on  whether 
they are registered or not, and allow a valid computer to either continue using the network or be 
denied network resource usage due one or another reason were summarized as in table 1 below. 

Table 1:  System modules execution report 

Functions  

Description  

Execution Status 
(Yes/No) 

Remarks  

New Computer 
registration 
Collect Computer’s 
Serial Number, IP 
address, Name  
Collect Computer’s 
authentication 
details with 
different access 
points (APs)  
Allow a registered 
computer network 
access  
Deny an 
unregistered 
computer network 
access 

Check if a new computer 
can be registered  
Check if authentication 
details can be collected 
from the system 
Check if authentication 
details can be collected 
from the system using 
different APs 

Check if a registered 
computer is allowed 
network access  
Check if an unregistered 
computer is denied network 
access 

Disable allowed 
computer 

Check if an allowed 
computer can be disabled 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Are confirmed in the 
Registered Devices interface  
Collected identification details 
are displayed on the 
Connected Devices interface 
Collected authentication 
details are displayed on the 
Connected Devices interface 
for three different APs 

Registered computers are 
displayed in the Connected 
Devices interface 
Unregistered computers are 
denied network access as 
indicated in the affected 
computers network access 
status interface   
This is confirmed by the 
disabled status of the computer 
in the Connected Devices 
interface and in the affected 
computers network access 
status interface   

3.3.  Prototype Evaluation 

For  validation  purposes,  proof  of  concept  method  on the  cumulative  essential  functionalities  of 
the  prototype  was  evaluated  using  test  runs  as  proposed  by  Diceus,  (2020)  based  on  goal-based 
evaluation method (Cronholm & Goldkuhl, 2003).  With the focus of being on intended services 

36 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Wireless & Mobile Networks (IJWMN), Vol.14, No.4, August 2022 

and  outcomes  of  a  program,  goal-based  evaluation  measures  the  extent  to  which  a  program 
attains its intended goals.  The prototype was fundamentally geared towards the ability to  

1.  Collect a computer’s authentication details (that is name, IP address and Serial number)  
2.  Allow a registered computer access to a network 
3.  Deny an unregistered computer access to a network  
4.  Control an already logged on computer to a network if need arises 

A set of three test runs  were carried out using static group comparison pre-experimental design. 
Just  as  in  the  initial experimentation  set  up,  each  set  had  three  computers  and  an  access  point.  
One  of  the  computers,  that  was  configured  as  server,  was  installed  with  the  serial  number 
authentication application.  For comparisons purposes, the other two computers were configured 
as clients, one for valid and the other for invalid expected outcomes.   

Each  set  was  carried  out  independently  by  a  wireless  LAN  stakeholder  (that  is,  a  network 
administrator, a Wi-Fi owner and an IT expert).  Each participant was given instruction on how to 
run  the  system  against  a  check  list  of  the  four  test  runs.    They  were  expected  to  observe  the 
behavior  when  the  system  is  run  and  manipulated  according  to  the  fundamental  questions  that 
corresponds  to  the  system  functionalities  and answer  yes  or  no  on  the  check  list  form  given  to 
them.    The  questions  on  the  checklist  that  corresponded  with  the  evaluation  goals  were  as 
follows; 

1.  Can  the  system  collect  a  logged  on  computer’s  authentication  details  (that  is  name,  IP 

address and Serial number)?  

2.  Can the system allow a registered computer access to a network? 
3.  Can the system deny an unregistered computer access to a network? 
4.  Can the system deny an already logged on computer to a network if need arises? 

The summary of the results from the three evaluators as indicated in appendix were summarized 
as in the table 2 below.  

Table 2:  Evaluators system modules execution report 

4. CONCLUSION 

From  the  discussions  based  on  the  design,  development,  demonstration  and  evaluation  of  a 
prototype that uses a computer’s serial number to authenticate a computer in a wireless LAN, the 
following findings, that are actually geared towards answering the study questions, can be made 
thus (i) an algorithm that can obtain a remote computer’s serial number in a wireless LAN can be 

37 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Wireless & Mobile Networks (IJWMN), Vol.14, No.4, August 2022 

developed  using  dynamic  programming  algorithm  design,  (ii)  a  model  that  uses  the  computer’s 
serial number to authenticate the computer in a wireless LAN can be designed using a state chart 
and  flowchart  diagrams,  (iii)  a  model  that  uses  the  computer’s  serial  number  to  authenticate  a 
computer  in  a  wireless  LAN  can  be  demonstrated  using  a  prototype  on  MySQL  database  and 
Java’s  NetBeans  IDE  tools  and  (iv)  that  the  model  that  uses  the  computer’s  serial  number  to 
authenticate  the  computer  in  a  wireless  LAN  can  be  evaluated  using  a  goal-based  evaluation 
method by independent evaluators.  Furthermore, the test runs from the prototype set up indicated 
that  the  SNAM  prototype  could  collect  a  logged  on  computer’s  authentication  details  (that  is 
name,  IP  address  and  Serial  number),  can  allow  a  registered computer  access  to a  network, can 
deny  an  unregistered  computer  access  to  a  network  and  that  it  can  deny  an  already  logged  on 
computer  to  a  network  if  need  arises.    In  turn,  a  serial  number  can  therefore,  be  used  to 
authenticate a computer in a wireless LAN.  It is then recommended that the prototype be scaled 
up so that it can adopted an authentication method. 

REFERENCES 

[1]  Apple 

Inc. 

(2011, 

July 

18). 

“Uniquely 

Identifying 

a  Macintosh  Computer”. 

https://developer.apple.com/library/mac/technotes/tn1103/_index.html 

[2]  Cardenas,  D.E.  (2018).  MAC  Spoofing:  An  Introduction  [White  Paper].  GIAC  Security  Essentials 

Certification (GSEC). https://www.giac.org/paper/gsec/3199/mac-spoofing-an-introduction/105315 

[3]  Chad,  F. 

(2017,  May  3).  “IP  Authentication  vs.  Username  and  Password  Login”. 

https://www.proxykey.com/ip-authentication-vs-username-password-login 

[4]  Chiradeep, B. (2021, June 28).  “What Is Network Access Control? Definition, Key Components, and 
https://www.toolbox.com/it-security/network-security/articles/what-is-network-

Best  Practices”. 
access-control 

[5]  Cisco. 

(2018,  August  14).  “Configuring  MAC-Based  Authentication  on  a  Switch”. 

https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/support/docs/smb/switches/cisco -350-series-managed-
switches/smb5836-configuring-mac-based-authentication-switch.html 

[6]  Derekyoung. 

(2017,  February  10).  “Ho w 

to  C han g e  a  BIOS   S eri al  Nu mber” . 

https://itstillworks.com/how-to-change-a-bios-serial-number-10394.html 

[7]  DHS.  (2017).  A  Guide  to  Securing  Networks  for  Wi-Fi  (IEEE  802.11  Family)  [White  Paper]. 
https://www.us-

Department 
cert.gov/sites/default/files/publications/A_Guide_to_Securing_Networks_for_Wi-Fi.pdf 

Homeland 

Security 

(DHS). 

of 

[8]  Diceus. 

(2022,  May  18).  “Top  5 

steps 

to  define  crucial  POC 

success  criteria”. 

https://diceus.com/poc-success-criteria/ 

[9]  Dordal,  P.L.  (2018).  An  introduction  to  Computer  Networks.  Loyola  University  Chicago. 

http://intronetworks.cs.luc.edu/current/ComputerNetworks.pdf 

[10]  EBSCO. 

(2022, 

February 

7). 

“What 

is 

IP 

Address 

Authentication”. 

https://connect.ebsco.com/s/article/What-is-IP-Address-Authentication?language=en_US 

[11]  Elkhodr, M. & Mufti, Z.B. (2019).  On The Challenges of Data Provenance in the Internet Of Things. 

International Journal of Wireless & Mobile Networks (IJWMN) (11)3, 43-52 

[12]  Elkhodr, M. Shahrestani, S. & Cheung, H. (2016). Emerging Wireless  Technologies in The  Internet 
Of  Things:  A  Comparative  Study.  International  Journal  of  Wireless  &  Mobile  Networks  (IJWMN) 
(8)5, 67-82 

[13]  Johnson,  K.  (2021,  December  14).  “Use  these  6  user  authentication  types  to  secure  networks”. 
https://www.techtarget.com/searchsecurity/tip/Use-these-6-user-authentication-types-to-secure-
networks 
[14]  Lawson,  L. 

Security  Problem 

(2017,  April 

Services:  A 

“Managed 

17). 

and 

Solution.”https://www.esecurityplanet.com/network-security/managed-services.html 

[15]  Lee,  T. 

(2010). 

Securing 

your  Meru  Network 

[White  Paper].  Meru  Networks. 

https://www.martolvan.is/spuningar-og-svor/skjoel-og-fraeesluefni/meru-networks/meru-
fraedhsluefni/1-meru-bpg-1/file 

[16]  Lehtonen, M., Staake, T., and Michahelles, F. (2008). From identification to authentication–a review 
of  RFID  product  authentication  techniques.    In  Networked  RFID  Systems  and  Lightweight 
Cryptography (pp. 169-187). Springer Berlin Heidelberg 

38 

 
 
 
International Journal of Wireless & Mobile Networks (IJWMN), Vol.14, No.4, August 2022 

[17]  MacPherson,  L.  (2018).  “5  Steps  to  a  Proof  of  Concept  for  Successful  Software  Development”. 

https://designli.co/blog/5-steps-proof-concept-successful-software-develoment 

[18]  Paramalways. (2009). Dynamic Programming, Technology, https://www.slideshare.net, 
[19]  Pierce,  M. 

(2021,  May  12).  “What 

  Network  Access  Control  Explained”. 

is  NAC? 

https://www.securedgenetworks.com/blog/network-access-control 

[20]  Poremba, S.M. (2022, January 24). “Network Access Control: Restricting and Monitoring Access to 
Your  Network  and  Data.”  https://www.esecurityplanet.com/network-security/network-access-
control.html 
[21]  Robb,  D. 

“Top  Network  Access  Control 
https://www.esecurityplanet.com/products/network-access-control-solutions/ 

January  24). 

for  2022”. 

(2022, 

(NAC) 

[22]  Romanov,  V.  &  Succi,  G.  (2018).    WLAN  BASED  POSITIONING  WITH  A  SINGLE  ACCESS 

POINT.  International Journal of Wireless & Mobile Networks (IJWMN) (10)3, 37-50 

[23]  Servicenow. 

(2022, 

“IP 
https://docs.servicenow.com/bundle/sandiego-platform-
administration/page/administer/login/concept/c_IPRangeBasedAuthentication.html 
(2021, 

September 

February 

Range 

Based 

13). 

M. 

3). 

E. 

Authentication”. 

“Authentication”. 

[24]  Shacklett, 

https://www.techtarget.com/searchsecurity/definition/authentication 

[25]  Singh,  R.  and  Sharma,  P.T.  (2017).  On  the  IEEE  802.11i  security:  a  denial-of-service  perspective. 

Security Communication Networks, (8)7, 1378–1407. http:/doi.org/10.1002/sec.1079 

[26]  SmartDraw. 

(2019). 
http://120.105.184.180/lwcheng/SSADM/ 

“HOW 

TO 

DRAW 

DATA 

FLOW 

DIAGRAMS”. 

[27]  Stallings,  W.  (2011).  Network  Security  Essentials,  Applications  and  Standards,  Fourth  Edition.  

Pearson Education 

[28]  Visual-paradigm.  (2018).  “How  to  Draw  an  Activity  Diagram  in  UML”.  https://www.visual-

paradigm.com/tutorials/how-to-draw-activity-diagram-in-uml/ 

[29]  Wallace, K. (2018, April 06). “Wireless LAN Security”. https://www.kwtrain.com/blog/wlan-security 
[30]  Watanabe,  Y.,  Otani,  M.,  Eto,  H.,  Watanabe  K.  &  Tadaki,  S.  (2013).  A  MAC  address  based 
authentication  system  applicable  to  campus-scale  network.   2013  15th  Asia-Pacific  Network 
Operations and Management Symposium (APNOMS), 2013, pp. 1-3 

39 

 
