Detection of Smart Grid Integrity Attacks Using
Signal Temporal Logic

Jos´e Ignacio Requeno
Dpto. de Sistemas Inform´aticos y Computaci´on
Universidad Complutense de Madrid
Madrid, Spain
jrequeno@ucm.es

2
2
0
2

p
e
S
6
1

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

2
v
2
2
7
6
0
.
9
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Cyber-attacks can have severe impacts on critical
infrastructures, from outages to economical loss and physical
damage to people and environment. One of the main targets
of these attacks is the smart grid. In this paper, we propose
a new software detector for integrity attacks targeting smart
meter readings. The detector relies upon mining parameters of
temporal logic speciﬁcations for integrity attack classiﬁcation.
To this end, we use Signal Temporal Logic (STL) for specifying
properties over time series. Our approach considers different
“attack scenarios” found in last years: given a parametric
formula for each “attack scenario” and a set of labeled traces,
we aim at ﬁnding the parameter valuation that validates each
template.

Index Terms—integrity attacks, smart grids, anomaly-based

detection, data mining, temporal logic, Signal Temporal Logic

I. INTRODUCTION

Smart grids are complex cyber-physical systems (CPS), built
on top of electrical power infrastructures. Their Advanced
Metering Infrastructure (AMI) allows better maintenance per-
formance (e.g., more timely remote diagnosis of meters issues
and service connection/disconnection) and efﬁcient monitor-
ing while keeping consumers informed on their consumption
habits. However they are vulnerable to cyber-attacks [1], which
may cause information leaks [2], energy theft [3] and many
other security, safety or economical issues [4].

In this ongoing work, we focus on the attacks that aim
at manipulating the consumers’ energy consumption for their
beneﬁt once they manage to hack into the AMI system [5].
The detection and identiﬁcation of frauds started with statis-
tical techniques [6], [7]. Since then, a variety of software
approaches to detect malicious attacks in power systems
appeared due to the fast development and exposition of AMI
in smart grids [8], [9]. Usually, AMI energy-theft attacks
are based on fault data injection or mimicking customers’
consumption proﬁles. Electricity theft detection methods range
from specialized methods on well-deﬁned attack strategies to
the discovery of general consumption behavior anomalies [10].
The goal is to distinguish between normal and anomalous
energy usage patterns in order to classify the samples in the
dataset into one of the predeﬁned attack proﬁles.

In this paper, we aim at proposing a new anomaly detection
technique to identify and classify suspicious behaviors such
as data manipulation that occurs in AMI, based on the data
collected from the smart meter.

The technique relies upon mining formal speciﬁcations from
observed traces (i.e., smart meter records) for the classiﬁcation
of attacks. In particular, we use Signal Temporal Logic (STL)
[11], a formalism for specifying properties over time series. In
this work, we aim at developing a new attack classiﬁer that is
more robust in terms of accuracy and explainability than other
(un)supervised data mining methods.

We plan to assess the performance and effectiveness of the
new detector by using the evaluation framework from our
previous work [12], where different “attack scenarios” found
in last years are considered.

II. DETECTION BASED ON MINING SPECIFICATIONS

Speciﬁcation mining looks for extracting formal speciﬁca-
tions (i.e., automata or logical expressions) that represent a
set of behaviors in a rigorous way. Most of the works use
Signal Temporal Logic (STL) [11] as the formal speciﬁcation
language for mining requirements in CPS [13], [14]. Some
of them propose methods to obtain the formula from scratch
while other approaches start with a preliminary template
(i.e., formula with parameters) and search for the parameter
valuations that align with the records in the CPS. In our case,
we follow the second approach. We address the detection of
integrity attacks on smart meters as a problem of multi-class
classiﬁcation, where each class represents an attack scenario.
The main issues to be tackled in the construction of the
prediction model are: 1) to deﬁne a template formula and 2)
to ﬁnd the set of parameters settings that discriminate multiple
classes of attacks. To this end, we use Parametric Signal
Temporal Logic (PSTL) [15] to formalize the speciﬁcation
of templates describing the attacks. In other words, we deﬁne
each attack scenario by a parametric temporal logic speciﬁca-
tion and our goal is to mine the range of parameter valuations
that characterizes an attack using a set of daily records from
a smart meter. Existing tools such as ParetoLib [16] help
computing the set of parameters settings by transforming the
parameter synthesis into a multicriteria optimization problem.
For instance, regular users usually have a higher consump-
tion during the evening, when they are back home, and not
too much during the night. Fig. 1 illustrates this pattern. It
shows the power consumption recorded by a smart meter
for one day (samples are taken every 30 minutes) [17].
Fig. 2 shows whether the accumulated power consumption

 
 
 
 
 
 
is below a threshold (p2) or not for the period [p1, 48] as
represented by PSTL Formula 1 with integrals (I): the green
area represents the combinations of values for parameters p1
and p2 that satisfy the formula, while the red area represents
the combination of p1 and p2 that don’t satisfy the formula.

On[p1,48]I x < p2

(1)

Fig. 1: Power consumption for one day starting at midnight.

Fig. 2: Combinations of p1 & p2 with regards to Formula 1.

Anomalous behaviors or attacks are detected if they return
consumption proﬁles different from Fig. 2. We aim at proving
through our experiments in our ongoing work that the integrity
attack detector based on mining formal speciﬁcations will pro-
vide more robust (i.e., explainable and accurate) results than
integrity attack detectors based on any other (un)supervised
data mining methods.

Besides, this type of approach usually requires a few train-
ing samples to tune the parametric speciﬁcation. However,
the most complex part of our proposal consists of getting
the parametric temporal logic speciﬁcation that clearly dis-
tinguishes each attack scenario. Finally, the computation of
exact solutions for the parameters settings is time consuming
but approximate methods exist.

III. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we show an ongoing work for the imple-
mentation of an integrity attack detector. The integrity attack
detector is based on mining temporal logic speciﬁcations from
labeled traces. Each attack is deﬁned as a parametric temporal
logic speciﬁcation with exclusive validity domain for each
parameter. In particular, we propose Signal Temporal Logic as
speciﬁcation language. We will apply data mining techniques

for learning the validity domain of parametric temporal logic
speciﬁcations. We expect that an integrity attack detector based
on parametric temporal logic speciﬁcations will provide more
robust results in terms of accuracy and explainability than
integrity attack detectors based on any other (un)supervised
data mining methods. In our future work, we have to complete
an exhaustive experimental evaluation of our approach and
compare the results with existing integrity attack detectors.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the Spanish Ministry of Science
and Innovation under project FAME (RTI2018-093608-B-C31)
and the Comunidad de Madrid under project FORTE-CM
(S2018/TCS-4314) co-funded by EIE Funds of the EU.

REFERENCES

[1] H. He and J. Yan, “Cyber-physical attacks and defences in the smart
grid: a survey,” IET Cyber-Physical Systems: Theory & Applications,
vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 13–27, 2016.

[2] M. A. Lisovich, D. K. Mulligan, and S. B. Wicker, “Inferring personal
information from demand-response systems,” IEEE Security & Privacy,
vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 11–20, 2010.

[3] S. McLaughlin, B. Holbert, A. Fawaz, R. Berthier, and S. Zonouz, “A
multi-sensor energy theft detection framework for advanced metering
infrastructures,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications,
vol. 31, no. 7, pp. 1319–1330, 2013.

[4] P. Kumar, Y. Lin, G. Bai, A. Paverd, J. S. Dong, and A. Martin, “Smart
grid metering networks: A survey on security, privacy and open research
issues,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 3,
pp. 2886–2927, 2019.

[5] A. Al-Ghaili, Zul-Ibrahim, S. Hairi, F. Rahim, H. Baskaran, N. Arifﬁn,
and H. Kasim, “A review of anomaly detection techniques in advanced
metering infrastructure,” Bulletin of Electrical Engineering and Infor-
matics, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 266–273, 2021.

[6] Y. Kou, C.-T. Lu, S. Sirwongwattana, and Y.-P. Huang, “Survey of fraud
detection techniques,” in IEEE Int. Conf. on Networking, Sensing and
Control, 2004, vol. 2, pp. 749–754, IEEE, 2004.

[7] R. J. Bolton, D. J. Hand, et al., “Statistical fraud detection: A review,”

Statistical science, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 235–255, 2002.

[8] R. Jiang, R. Lu, Y. Wang, J. Luo, C. Shen, and X. Shen, “Energy-
theft detection issues for advanced metering infrastructure in smart grid,”
Tsinghua Science and Technology, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 105–120, 2014.

[9] Y. Wang, Q. Chen, T. Hong, and C. Kang, “Review of smart meter
data analytics: Applications, methodologies, and challenges,” IEEE
Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 3125–3148, 2018.
[10] P. Jokar, N. Arianpoo, and V. C. Leung, “Electricity theft detection in
AMI using customers’ consumption patterns,” IEEE Transactions on
Smart Grid, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 216–226, 2015.

[11] O. Maler and D. Nickovic, “Monitoring temporal properties of contin-
uous signals,” in Int. Conf. on Formal Modelling and Analysis of Timed
Systems, 2004, vol. 3253 of LNCS, pp. 152–166, Springer, 2004.
[12] S. Bernardi, R. Javierre, J. Merseguer, and J. I. Requeno, “Detectors of
smart grid integrity attacks: an experimental assessment,” in European
Dependable Computing Conference, pp. 75–82, IEEE, 2021.

[13] Z. Kong, A. Jones, and C. Belta, “Temporal logics for learning and
detection of anomalous behavior,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Control., vol. 62,
no. 3, pp. 1210–1222, 2017.

[14] B. Hoxha, A. Dokhanchi, and G. Fainekos, “Mining parametric temporal
logic properties in model-based design for cyber-physical systems,” Int.
J. Softw. Tools Technol. Transf., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 79–93, 2018.
[15] E. Asarin, A. Donz´e, O. Maler, and D. Nickovic, “Parametric identi-
ﬁcation of temporal properties,” in Int. Conf. on Runtime Veriﬁcation,
2011,, vol. 7186 of LNCS, pp. 147–160, Springer, 2011.

[16] A. Bakhirkin, N. Basset, O. Maler, and J. I. Requeno, “Paretolib:
A python library for parameter synthesis,” in Int. Conf. on Formal
Modeling and Analysis of Timed Systems, vol. 11750 of LNCS, pp. 114–
120, Springer, 2019.

[17] Irish

Social

Science

Data

Archive,

Commission

Energy Regulation, CER Smart Metering Project.
https://www.ucd.ie/issda/data/commissionforenergyregulationcer/.

for
URL:

