The pathﬁnder Dragonﬂy Spectral Line Mapper: Pushing the
limits for ultra-low surface brightness spectroscopy

Deborah M. Lokhorsta, Seery Chenb,c, Imad Pashad, Jeﬀ Shenb,c, Evgeni I. Malakhove,
Roberto G. Abrahamb,c, and Pieter van Dokkumd

aNRC Herzberg Astronomy & Astrophysics Research Centre, 5071 West Saanich Road,
Victoria, BC V9E2E7, Canada
bDavid A. Dunlap Department of Astronomy & Astrophysics, University of Toronto, 50 St.
George Street, Toronto, ON M5S3H4, Canada
cDunlap Institute, University of Toronto, 50 St. George Street, Toronto, ON M5S3H4, Canada
dDepartment of Astronomy, Yale University, 52 Hillhouse Ave., New Haven, CT 06511, USA
eNew Mexico Skies, Inc., 9 Contentment Crest, Mayhill, NM 88339, USA

ABSTRACT

The pathﬁnder Dragonﬂy Spectral Line Mapper is a distributed aperture telescope based oﬀ of the Dragonﬂy
Telephoto Array with additional instrumentation (the Dragonﬂy “Filter-Tilter”) to enable ultranarrow bandpass
imaging. The pathﬁnder is composed of three redundant optical tube assemblies (OTAs) which are mounted
together to form a single ﬁeld of view imaging telescope (where the eﬀective aperture diameter increases as
the square-root of the number of OTAs). The pathﬁnder has been on sky from March 2020 to October 2021
equipped with narrowband ﬁlters to provide proof-of-concept imaging, surface brightness limit measurements, on
sky testing, and observing software development. Here we describe the pathﬁnder telescope and the sensitivity
limits reached along with observing methods. We outline the current limiting factors for reaching ultra-low surface
brightnesses and present a comprehensive comparison of instrument sensitivities to low surface brightness line
emission and other methods of observing the ultra-faint line emission from diﬀuse gas. Finally, we touch on plans
for the upcoming 120-OTA Dragonﬂy Spectral Line Mapper, which is currently under construction.

Keywords: low surface brightness; narrowband imaging; wide-ﬁeld imaging; circumgalactic medium; ground-
based telescopes

1. INTRODUCTION

Directly imaging low surface brightness structures presents a unique challenge as the features of interest are
potentially millions of times fainter than the brightest objects in a typical image. This huge dynamic range
coupled with systematic errors that are typically negligible or correctable (e.g., scattering in telescope optics,
detector ampliﬁcation) greatly impacts our ability to detect low surface brightness features. The archetype
of low surface brightness phenomena is the largest and faintest structure in the universe: the ‘cosmic web’.
Cosmological simulations predict that on large scales dark matter collapses to form the cosmic web, taking on a
foamlike structure that permeates the universe with galaxies forming at the nodes of this web. Gas ﬂows along
the ﬁlaments of the cosmic web (the intergalactic medium) into giant reservoirs of gas surrounding galaxies (the
circumgalactic medium), then transitions into galaxies to fuel star formation. The gas in the cosmic web is
nearly invisible, emitting mainly through ﬂuorescence as the gas slowly cools. The prospect of directly detecting
the ultra-low surface brightness line emission from cosmic web has spurred the development of technological
upgrades in astronomical instrumentation. In particular, there have been several recent and ongoing projects to
build instruments that aim to directly observe line emission from the circumgalactic and intergalactic medium,
such as the Cosmic Web Imager (CWI) at Palomar Observatory1 and the Keck Cosmic Web Imager (KCWI) at
the W. M. Keck Observatory.2, 3

Send correspondence to D.M.L.: deborah.lokhorst@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca

2
2
0
2

p
e
S
5
1

]

M

I
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
7
8
4
7
0
.
9
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
Imaging the circumgalactic and intergalactic media remains very diﬃcult due to the faintness of emission
from the diﬀuse gas, but there has been recent success at high redshifts where rest-frame ultraviolet (UV)
emission lines are targeted by integral ﬁeld spectrometers such as CWI and KCWI, as well as the Multi-Unit
Spectroscopic Explorer (MUSE) on the Very Large Telescope (VLT).4 In the past decade, integral ﬁeld units
with spectroscopic capability have discovered an abundance of extragalactic gaseous structures, including gaseous
bridges between galaxies and quasars,5, 6 enormous hundreds-of-kpc-sized gas clouds,7, 8 and extensive gaseous
haloes detected in a variety of emission lines including Lyα, [Oii], and Mg ii.9–12 These techniques work well
for medium to high redshift observations, where bright UV lines such as the Lyα λ1216 and Mg ii λ2796, 2803
emission lines are redshifted into the visible wavelength regime and where the (cid:46) 1 arcmin2 ﬁelds of view of these
instruments can cover an appreciable area around the targeted galaxies. In the local universe, though, the bright
UV emission lines are not accessible from the ground and while visible wavelength emission lines such as Hα and
[Oiii] are accessible, they are an order of magnitude fainter, requiring sensitivity to surface brightnesses down
to

10−20 erg cm−2 s−1 arcsec−2 to detect.13

∼
As we have shown in Ref. 13, and discuss in detail below, it should be possible for an upgraded Dragonﬂy
Telephoto Array14 (Dragonﬂy) with ultranarrowband imaging capability to reach this low surface brightness limit
and directly detect visible wavelength line emission from gas in the circumgalactic medium.13, 15 Dragonﬂy is a
telescope specially designed for low surface brightness imaging. Its design is based on the innovative concept of
building an extremely fast refracting telescope using lenses instead of mirrors to reduce scattering of light in the
optics and multiplexing together an array of high-end commercial lenses to synthesize a larger eﬀective aperture.
Over the past few years, Dragonﬂy has made a series of groundbreaking discoveries, helping to rekindle the long-
neglected study of the low surface brightness universe. Dragonﬂy’s success in detecting low surface brightness
stellar structures prompted the question of whether Dragonﬂy, with its unprecedented sensitivity to the diﬀuse
stellar continuum, could be modiﬁed to detect the extremely faint line emission from the circumgalactic and
intergalactic media.

The pathﬁnder Dragonﬂy Spectral Line Mapper was built to test this concept. Its basic design and compo-
nents were modeled oﬀ of the Dragonﬂy Telephoto Array with the addition of instrumentation to incorporate
ultranarrowband imaging capability. The pathﬁnder Dragonﬂy Spectral Line Mapper uses the Dragonﬂy Filter-
Tilter instrumentation described in Ref. 15 to implement ultranarrowband ﬁlters on the telescope at the front
of the optics. This is important for two main reasons: 1) to prevent degradation of the ﬁlter transmission
proﬁle that inevitably occurs when interference ﬁlters are placed in converging beams and 2) to incorporate a
rotational mechanism to tilt the ﬁlter, which smoothly shifts the bandpass in wavelength space. Rotating an
20◦ enables it to target the same cosmological volume as a typical narrowband ﬁlter
ultranarrowband ﬁlter by
of bandwidth
10 nm. The pathﬁnder Dragonﬂy Spectral Line Mapper was used to carry out an imaging
survey on the M81 group of galaxies utilizing ultranarrowband ﬁlters selected to target Hα and [Nii] emission.
These observations functioned as both a proof-of-concept and a scientiﬁc survey of the group. The Hα and [Nii]
emission from the group was imaged separately with the same ﬁlters by rotating the ultranarrowband ﬁlters to
two diﬀerent angles with respect to the optical axis. The resulting data revealed many new gaseous features in
the group, including a giant cloud of gas in the outskirts of the M82 galaxy.16

∼

∼

Here we describe the pathﬁnder Dragonﬂy Spectral Line Mapper and the observing methods used to carry out
the imaging survey. This includes several upgrades and additions to the observing methods and software used by
the Dragonﬂy Telephoto Array, such as calibration of the Dragonﬂy Filter-Tilter and additional hardware for ﬂat-
ﬁeld imaging. Finally, we compare the sensitivity of the Dragonﬂy Spectral Line Mapper with other observatories
and instruments that are designed to detect similar features, and extrapolate on the ﬁnal sensitivities expected
to be reached by the full Dragonﬂy Spectral Line Mapper, which is under construction. The Dragonﬂy Spectral
Line Mapper will have 120 lenses, 40
the collected area of the pathﬁnder, including a specialized suite of ﬁlters
to enable sub-percent calibration of the science frames.

×

This paper is one of three in a series in these proceedings on imaging the low surface brightness universe with
distributed aperture telescopes and the Dragonﬂy Telephoto Array. Table 1 summarizes the topics covered by
each paper.

Table 1. Content summary of the three papers in this series, with the topics covered by this paper in bold.

Distributed aperture telescope general concepts

Low surface brightness imaging challenges

Lessons learned from Dragonﬂy
Narrowband imaging concepts and methods

Abraham et al.

Abraham et al.

Abraham et al.

This article

Narrowband imaging survey speed

This article
Dragonﬂy Spectral Line Mapper pathﬁnder results & lessons learned This article

Dragonﬂy Spectral Line Mapper design

Dragonﬂy Spectral Line Mapper laboratory tests

Dragonﬂy Spectral Line Mapper roadmap

Chen et al.

Chen et al.

Chen et al.

Figure 1. The pathﬁnder Dragonﬂy Spectral Line Mapper, on sky from the spring of 2019 to the fall of 2021 is pictured in
the left panel. A schematic representation of the pathﬁnder is also shown, with the components and connections between
computers and devices labeled.

2. THE DRAGONFLY SPECTRAL LINE MAPPER PATHFINDER

The pathﬁnder Dragonﬂy Spectral Line Mapper is a 3-lens version of the Dragonﬂy Telephoto Array with Drag-
onﬂy Filter-Tilter instrumentation that implements ultranarrow-bandpass imaging capability on the telescope
(as described in Ref. 15). The pathﬁnder Dragonﬂy Spectral Line Mapper was built at New Mexico Skies Ob-
servatories in Mayhill, New Mexico, in the spring of 2019. Commissioning and science data were collected from
2019 through 2021. The pathﬁnder is composed of three separate and identical optical tube assemblies (OTAs;
pictured in the left panel of Fig. 1). A schematic of the pathﬁnder is shown in the right panel of Fig. 1. Each
OTA consists of a Canon telephoto 400mm f /2.8 IS lens with a 14.2 cm diameter aperture along with a Birger
focuser, and a Diﬀraction Limited Aluma CCD694 camera with an angular scale of 2.45(cid:48)(cid:48) per pixel. This sensor
1◦.9 ﬁeld
has 2750
of view. In addition, each OTA is equipped with Dragonﬂy Filter-Tilter instrumentation,15 which holds a 152
mm diameter ultranarrowband ﬁlter at the entrance pupil of each OTA. The Dragonﬂy Filter-Tilter mechani-
cally tilts the ﬁlter with respect to incident light, eﬀectively changing the incidence angle and thus the central
wavelength of the ﬁlter bandpass. Each Filter-Tilter is driven by a 28BJY-48 stepper motor with 2048 steps per
revolution, controlled in a closed-loop feedback system by a Gravity 360 Degree Hall Angle Sensor. The ﬁlters
are allowed to rotate from -20◦ to +20◦ around an axis perpendicular to the optical axis. Due to the properties

2200 pixels at 4.54 microns square, resulting in a 14.6 mm

12.8 mm chip size and a 1◦.4

×

×

×

Table 2. Speciﬁcations of the pathﬁnder Dragonﬂy Spectral Line Mapper.

Parameter

Value

Eﬀective aperture

Eﬀective focal length

Field of view

Camera

Detector

Pixel size

Optics

Filters

Mount

3)

×

24.6 cm (14.3 cm
40 cm (f /1.6)
1◦.4
SBIG Aluma CCD694

1◦.9

×

×

2200 CCD

Sony ICX 694, 2750
4.54 µm (2.45(cid:48)(cid:48))
Canon Telephoto 400mm f/2.8 IS II,
Canon Telephoto 400mm f/2.8 IS II,
Canon Telephoto 400mm f/2.8 IS III
See Table 3

Paramount ME II

Table 3. Speciﬁcations of the Iridian Spectral Technologies Inc. Dragonﬂy Filter.

Parameter

Central Wavelength at 0◦ angle of incidence
Bandwidth

Out-of-band blocking

Clear Aperture Diameter

Operating temperature

Transmittance

Value

659.9 nm

3 nm
<OD4 200 - 1100 nm

152 mm
-10◦C to +20◦C
Peak Tx >95% with Tx >90% for bandwidth >2.0 nm

≈

of the narrowband interference ﬁlters, this shifts the central wavelength of the ﬁlter from its 0◦ angle of incidence
value by up to
8 nm. The ﬁlters used for these observations have a central wavelength of 659.9 nm in vacuum
and FWHM of 3 nm. See Ref. 15 for further details on the theory and instrument design of the Dragonﬂy Filter-
Tilter. A custom designed baﬄe was built for each OTA to block stray light contamination from entering the
optical path. The pathﬁnder instrument also includs electroluminescent ﬂat ﬁeld panels (commercially available
Aniltak Flip-Flats) that were mounted at the front of each OTA to collect ﬂat ﬁeld images. The panels were used
to collect ﬂat ﬁeld images during the night in between science exposures at the same pointing and ﬁlter rotation
as used for the science frame collection. The elements of the pathﬁnder Dragonﬂy Spectral Line Mapper are
summarized in Table 2 for quick reference.

2.1 Observing Software

The pathﬁnder Dragonﬂy Spectral Line Mapper used the observing software package written for the Dragonﬂy
Telephoto Array14 with several additions to integrate the required ultranarrowband instrumentation. The Drag-
onﬂy observing software is designed to allow completely autonomous observing, through all manner of weather
conditions. The observing software is adaptive; upon starting observations for the night, it checks before each
science exposure whether it should continue or not (e.g., it will stop taking science images if the weather has
reported cloudy or dome is closed). Depending on dome and sky conditions, it carries out the optimal task,
such as a science exposure, dark frame exposure (due to cloudy weather conditions), or ﬂat-ﬁeld exposure (due
to the rising of the sun). Dragonﬂy uses an Internet-of-Things framework to control each OTA of the telescope.
In this framework, API commands are sent from a control PC to the OTAs, each of which has its own Intel
Compute Stick. The observing commands are sent over web servers that run on each Intel Stick. Each Intel

Stick is connected through USB or serial ports to the components of the OTA, allowing it to control the camera,
focuser, Filter-Tilter and Flip-Flat for that speciﬁc OTA. The connections between the computers and devices
are shown diagrammatically in the bottom-middle panel of Fig. 1.

The Dragonﬂy observing software worked well for controlling the pathﬁnder Dragonﬂy Spectral Line Mapper,
but it was not a direct drop-in replacement. In particular, the Dragonﬂy Filter-Tilter control and ﬂat-frame
collection needed to be developed and integrated with the observing software. In addition, with the change from
broadband to narrowband ﬁlters, several smaller changes, such as the adjustment of exposure times for focusing
frames, were necessary. We detail these modiﬁcations and additions for the interested reader here.

1. Filter-Tilter Control Software. In order to carry out observations on the pathﬁnder Dragonﬂy Spectral Line
Mapper, the observing software needed to be updated to also include an API to control the Filter-Tilter
rotation. The software to control the Filter-Tilters was integrated into the observing software to allow
the ﬁlters to be automatically tilted to the correct rotation before each integration. This required adding
RESTful API calls to the Dragonﬂy observing software. Tilting the ﬁlters now requires just a single extra
parameter when starting the observations and is fully automated during the night without needing any
intervention from the observer. Additional software for carrying out automated Filter-Tilter calibration
was also developed and is described in Section 2.2.

2. Flat ﬁeld frame collection. The observing software was updated to include gathering ﬂat ﬁeld frames using
illumination panels (“Flip-Flats”) which are commercially available. Each lens on the pathﬁnder has its
own Flip-Flat. During the night, ﬂat frames at each observing tilt of the ﬁlter can be taken to allow an
accurate calibration in the case of any ﬂexure in the equipment. Observing software was added to carry
out the ﬂat frame collection automatically after each set of science exposures.

3. Lens focusing. The script for focusing the lenses was modiﬁed to allow the exposure time for the focus-
ing images to be adjusted. Longer exposure times were necessary because of the signiﬁcantly narrower
bandwidth of the pathﬁnder Dragonﬂy Spectral Line Mapper ﬁlters compared to the Dragonﬂy broadband
ﬁlters.

2.2 Filter-Tilter Calibration Method

The operation of the pathﬁnder Dragonﬂy Spectral Line Mapper relies on the ability to set the desired central
wavelength of the ﬁlter by tilting the ﬁlters. In order to tilt to a speciﬁc wavelength on command, a calibration
of the zeropoint of the ﬁlter tilt is required. In this Section, we describe the current calibration method.

The shift in the central wavelength of a ﬁlter is a smoothly varying monotonic function of the tilt of the
ﬁlter and the angle of incidence of the light across the ﬁeld-of-view can be easily modelled. This means that the
calibration of the tilt of the ﬁlter is a straightforward process using a target radiating line emission (or at least
quasi-monochromatic emission) at a wavelength within the range swept by the ﬁlter bandpass during tilting (i.e.,
within the 653.9 nm to 659.9 nm range scanned by the pathﬁnder Dragonﬂy Spectral Line Mapper ﬁlters during
tilting, which have a central wavelength of 659.9 nm). We used two diﬀerent light sources for this calibration:
1) a laser with a central wavelength of 657.4 nm and bandwidth 0.61 nm (measured at room temperature) and
2) line emission from a planetary nebula.

The ﬁrst method of calibration consists of taking images of the laser shining on a target at a distance of
about 20 m from the telescope. The chosen laser is stable over periods of about 30 minutes, which is suﬃcient
for laser calibration, which takes 5 to 10 minutes. However, the wavelength of the inexpensive laser used has a
strong dependence on the temperature and, as the laser is mounted inside the telescope dome in the open air,
20 ◦C between winter and summer nights. This results in a variation
there is a temperature diﬀerence of ∆T
in the lasing wavelength of up to 5 nm for our observations. To mitigate this uncertainty in our calibration, we
either use corrected laser speciﬁcations for the temperature during calibration or make the setup independent of
the lasing wavelength by tilting to an angle of 20◦ in both directions and using the midpoint distance between
the two peaks as the ﬁlter bandpass shifts through the lasing wavelength to calibrate the tilt. A series of images
of the laser-illuminated target were taken at diﬀerent tilts, after which the images were analysed to determine
the brightness of the reﬂected laser through the ﬁlter in each image. These results were compared to a model of

≈

Figure 2. Left panel: The laser ﬂux through the narrowband ﬁlters measured for tilts between -20 and +20 degrees; the
orange, purple and gray data points are measured from the units of the narrowband Dragonﬂy pathﬁnder independently.
A model of the laser throughput through the ﬁlters is shown as the green line. The model and data are well-matched,
providing a straight-forward calibration method by ﬁtting the model to our data to ﬁnd the zeropoint of the ﬁlter tilt.
Right panel: The measured brightness of the planetary nebula NGC 6543 at a series of ﬁlter tilts from 0 to 20 deg (shown
for each unit of the Dragonﬂy narrowband set up as the orange, purple, and gray datapoints). The measurements are
compared to models of the planetary nebula throughput, taking into account Hα and [Nii] emission from the planetary
nebula.

the throughput of the laser light as a function of ﬁlter tilt, which is shown in the left panel of Fig. 2. The laser
20◦ to +20◦ to create the two peaks described above and by ﬁtting the model
ﬂux was measured from a tilt of
to the data, the zeropoint of the ﬁlter tilt was determined.

−

The second method of calibration is identical to the ﬁrst method, except that instead of using a target
illuminated by a laser, an astronomical source of line emission is used. In the second panel of Fig. 2 the results
20◦
for imaging the planetary nebula NGC 6543 (the “Cat’s Eye” Nebula) at a series of ﬁlter tilts from 0
are shown. In this case, the known wavelength of Hα emission from the planetary nebula is used to model the
transmission through the ﬁlter bandpass and ﬁt to the calibration observations to determine the zeropoint of the
ﬁlter. For this set of calibration observations, there is an excess of emission redward of the Hα emission, which
is attributed to [Nii] emission from NGC 6543. A combined model of Hα and [Nii] emission at the redshift of
NGC 6543 was created to determine a better ﬁt to the data. A relative fraction of 0.12 between the Hα and the
[Nii] emission yielded the best ﬁt to the data. This method can be used to properly ﬁt the observed emission
curve for a variety of astronomical sources during calibration analysis.

−

3. ULTRA-LOW SURFACE BRIGHTNESS OBSERVATIONS

An imaging campaign on the M81 group of galaxies was undertaken in the spring of 2020 with the pathﬁnder
version of the Dragonﬂy Spectral Line Mapper. Narrowband imaging of Hα and [Nii] emission from the galaxy
group was collected from March 2020 to October 2021. These observations served as proof-of-concept imaging to
determine the surface brightness limits of the instrument, as well as scientiﬁc imaging, the results of which are
presented in Ref. 16. The observations followed the Dragonﬂy automated observing model, where the telescope
is set up every night for observing at the beginning of the night and the telescope carries out observations
autonomously, adapting to changing weather conditions and pausing observations when necessary. In total, this
resulted in 73 nights of data collection over the months of February to June 2020 and a total of 652 on-target
science frames collected with individual exposure times of 1800 seconds. After the removal of frames with low
image quality (e.g., due to poor focusing, poor guiding, poor seeing, etc.), the total exposure time with the
3-lens pathﬁnder that was included in the ﬁnal science frames was 31.7 hours and 15.3 hours for the Hα and

Figure 3. False colour image of M81 and M82 obtained with the Dragonﬂy Telephoto Array in g and r band imaging.
Overlaid in red is Hα data obtained with the 3-unit Dragonﬂy Spectral Line Mapper pathﬁnder. The Hα imaging revealed
a multitude of star formation complexes in M81 and the expansive M82 outﬂow that connects M82 to the “Hα cap” above
the disk.18, 19 In this imaging not only is the Hα cap clearly visible but also a variety of new features including a tidal
dwarf galaxy candidate at the edge of the M82 disk (Ref. 20; within the dashed gray box), Hα emission from the tidal
streamer appearing to connect the edge of the disk to the Hα cap, and the most striking discovery of a giant cloud of gas
seeming to hover above the M82 galaxy, the Hα shell.16

[Nii] science images, respectively (see Ref. 15 for further details). The data were taken with the ﬁlters at two
diﬀerent tilts: 12.5◦ to target the Hα λ6563 emission line and 7◦ to target the [Nii] λ6583 emission line. Tilting
the ﬁlters smoothly shifts the ﬁlter central wavelength, and these two tilts shifted the ﬁlter central wavelengths
to 656.3 nm and 683.5 nm, respectively. In addition, data were collected with the Dragonﬂy Telephoto Array
(in the conﬁguration most recently described in Ref. 17) yielding r and g band continuum images with exposure
3◦
times of 12.5 minutes and 10 minutes, respectively. The ﬁnal science images had a total ﬁeld of view of
10−19 erg cm−2 s−1 arcsec−2 to the 3σ level on a 4(cid:48) spatial
and reached an Hα surface brightness limit of
scale. A composite r and g band image along with the high signal-to-noise regions of the pathﬁnder Dragonﬂy
Spectral Line Mapper Hα data is shown in Fig. 3.

2◦

×

×

∼

∼

5

The deep, wide-ﬁeld data conﬁrmed previously discovered low surface brightness features in the ﬁeld such as
the M82 Hα cap,18, 19 as well as several new features and extensions to already known features in the group. These
included a secondary ridge of Hα emission between the Hα cap and the M82 galaxy, as well as emission ﬁlling
the region between the M82 galaxy and the Hα cap. In addition, Hα emission from a tidal dwarf candidate and
emission corresponding to the HI tidal streamer on the northeast side of the M82 disk were discovered (indicated
by dashed box in Fig. 3; Ref. 20). The most striking result of this imaging campaign was the discovery of a
colossal cloud of gas in the outskirts of the M82 galaxy with an extent of 0.8 deg (labelled in Fig. 3), which is
analyzed further in Ref. 16.

Figure 4. A master dark formed from the combination of 10 1800s dark frames is shown in the left panel, a single dark
frame of 1800s is shown in the middle panel, and the residual from the subtraction of the master dark from the single dark
frame is shown in the right panel. There is signiﬁcant ampliﬁer glow and bias circuitry glow visible in the dark frames
(locations most aﬀected are indicated on the frames).

The main goal with this instrument was to reach the surface brightnesses required to directly image the
ultra-faint line emission from gas in the surroundings of galaxies, and determine what improvements upon
the instrument would be necessary before undertaking the construction of the full-scale Dragonﬂy Spectral Line
Mapper. In order to reach these low surface brightness limits, the calibration of our data needed to be undertaken
with care. To ensure that our observations are sky noise limited, dark noise and ﬂat-ﬁeld corrections needed to
be carried out to below 0.1%. The data collection followed the Dragonﬂy model of collecting data regardless of
sky conditions and then removing frames that are classiﬁed as “bad” during the data reduction pipeline. This
automatically removed a signiﬁcant fraction of the frames due to poor image quality. In addition to this data cut,
we also inspected the frames by eye to search for and remove frames with contamination that were not caught
by the automated pipeline. Together, this resulted in using only 279 out of the 652 science frames collected to
create the ﬁnal science images. In the following Sections, we delve into the analysis of the main sources of noise
in the narrowband data and the methods for their removal. We identify several improvements in hardware and
calibration frame collection that will be incorporated in the full-scale Dragonﬂy Spectral Line Mapper design
and operation.

3.1 Dark Frame Stability

The Aluma CCD694 cameras used with the Dragonﬂy Spectral Line Mapper pathﬁnder were selected for their
low dark current (0.025 electron s−1 pixel−1) and readout noise (4 electron RMS). In half an hour dark frame
exposures, it was observed that there were additional signiﬁcant sources of noise in the images above the dark
current and readout noise: glow from ampliﬁer and bias circuitry (e.g., Figs 4 and 5). While the dark current and
readout noise met the requirements for the low surface brightness limits in the data, the noise from the ampliﬁer
and bias circuitry proved diﬃcult to remove due to their ﬂuctuation over time. To quantify this variation, we
collected a series of half an hour dark frames over each night for one week and a set of dark frames spread out
over the time frame of a month. While the background noise level in the regions of the frame unaﬀected by
glow from the ampliﬁer and bias circuitry stayed consistent with the Poisson noise of the dark current (RMS
30
counts in the raw images), the ampliﬁer and bias circuitry noise varied considerably.

∼

The ampliﬁer glow and bias circuitry glow is visible in the dark images displayed in Fig. 4, which shows a
master dark formed out of 10 dark frames with exposure times of 1800s on the left panel, a single dark with
an exposure time of 1800s in the middle panel, and the residual from the subtraction of the master dark from
the single dark in the right panel. This residual is a replica of the dark noise that would remain after dark
frame subtraction in a science exposure of 1800s, representing the combination of noise from the dark current
and readout. An increase in noise is visible in the areas aﬀected by the ampliﬁer and bias circuitry. Fig. 5 shows
averages over rows in 10 dark frames taken during one night, as well as the master dark. It is apparent that the

Figure 5. Comparison of the counts in rows 100, 500, and 1500 (averaged over the surrounding 10 rows, and averaged
over 25 columns to reduce noise) in 10 1800s dark exposures taken on the same night along and the master dark made
from the combination of these 10 dark frames. There is a shift in the bias level between darks, which is nonlinear in the
regions aﬀected by bias circuitry and ampliﬁer glow (e.g., row 100).

Figure 6. Comparison of Hα science exposure stack with and without removing frames with poor dark frame subtraction.
Including the frames with poor dark subtraction (left panel) results in large variation with a cutoﬀ along a speciﬁc
declination. Removing those frames and redoing the science exposure stack (right panel) removes that linear feature,
but also results in lower signal-to-noise throughout the frame. This eﬀect is partly due to repeated dither positions used
during exposures on diﬀerent nights which ended up aligning the regions with dark noise in the science image.

underlying bias level shifts through the night, so the master dark is not representative of the complete sample of
dark frames. The shift in the bias level adds a noise ﬂoor to the data which is removed during the sky modeling
and subtraction step of the Dragonﬂy pipeline. Any nonlinearity in the noise ﬂoor such as the ampliﬁer glow
and bias circuitry glow remains in the science frame, though, as they are not ﬁt and subtracted during the sky
modeling step. This added a systematic noise source into the science frames, creating an artiﬁcial low surface
brightness feature within the ﬁnal science frames. This feature was apparent in the ﬁnal science image despite the

Figure 7. The left plot shows a calibrated and stacked ﬂat taken by one of the pathﬁnder Dragonﬂy Spectral Line
Mapper OTAs at a ﬁlter tilt of 0 degrees using the electroluminescent ﬂat-ﬁelding panel. The middle plot shows the cos4
vignetting model (Equation 1) ﬁtted to the data. The center x-pixel, xc, and center y-pixel, yc, for each ﬂat as a function
of ﬁlter angle are shown in the right panel, where the center position is calculated from the cos4 vignetting model.

∼

15(cid:48) dithering of the telescope between science exposures and

15(cid:48) oﬀset in pointing between the three OTAs.
∼
In order to remove this noise source, the data reduction pipeline was modiﬁed with an additional step of cropping
the raw images to remove the bottom physical section of the image where the ampliﬁer and bias circuitry glow
showed up. This successfully removed the false feature caused by the systematic noise in the science frame.
This is shown in Fig. 6, which displays Hα science image stacks with and without removing frames with poor
dark frame subtraction. Including the frames with poor dark subtraction (left panel) results in large variation
with a cutoﬀ along a speciﬁc declination. Removing those frames and redoing the science exposure stack (right
panel) removes that linear feature, but also results in lower signal-to-noise throughout the frame. This eﬀect is
partly due to repeated dither positions used during exposures on diﬀerent nights which ended up aligning the
regions with dark noise perfectly in the science image. We will be using randomized dither patterns with the full
Dragonﬂy Spectral Line Mapper to avoid this eﬀect, which is magniﬁed as the exposure times increase in length.
Newer Aluma CCD694 cameras use modiﬁed electronics and ﬁrmware, and the ampliﬁer and bias circuitry glow
have been signiﬁcantly reduced since this data was collected (see our companion paper, Chen, S. et al. 2022, for
further details).

3.2 Flat Fielding Stability

Flat-ﬁelds for the Dragonﬂy Spectral Line Mapper pathﬁnder were collected using electroluminescent ﬂat-ﬁelding
panels (Alnitak Flip-Flats). This allowed us to collect ﬂats at a series of diﬀerent tilts. To investigate the eﬀects
of diﬀerent ﬁlter tilt angles on the ﬂat ﬁelding, ﬂats were taken at tilt angles from 0 to 10 degrees, in increments
of 1 degree. Five ﬂats were taken at each angle, and combined to make a master ﬂat at each angle. We modeled
the bright center and dimmer edges as cos4 vignetting for the master ﬂat at each angle; an example is shown in
Fig. 7 for a ﬁlter rotated to an angle of 0 deg. The cos4 vignetting is given by the following function:

z = A cos4


(cid:115)(cid:18) x


−
a

(cid:19)2

xc

(cid:18) y

+

yc

−
b

(cid:19)2

 + B

(1)

where z is the pixel value, xc is the center x-pixel, yc is the center y-pixel, a and b are the semi minor/major
axes of the ellipse, and A is the scaling amplitude, and B is the oﬀset. For simplicity, a = b, as after ﬁtting the
data with both a and b variable we ﬁnd a

b, diﬀering by about 1-3 pixels.

≈
The center point of the vignetting moved

100 pixels depending on the tilt of the ﬁlter. The right panel
of Fig. 7 shows the variation of the center pixel location in the ﬁtted model as a function of the tilt of the ﬁlter.
At larger angles the center pixel (xc, yc) moves “left and up”. The vignetting depends on the tilt of the ﬁlter,
making it necessary to collect ﬂats at the same tilt angles as those used during Dragonﬂy science observations
to carry out a robust calibration from the ﬂat ﬁeld images. The nonlinearity of the shift in the position of the
center pixel with ﬁlter angle may be due to the shift in the shape of the spectral response across the ﬁeld of view

10

−

∼

Figure 8. Many of the frames collected by the pathﬁnder Dragonﬂy Spectral Line Mapper where contaminated by light
structures. The left column of images shows two prominent examples that together aﬀected ∼ 100 data frames. In the
right column is models of the background sky which shows two distinct types of light features that appeared for some
time in the data.

which is symmetric at a ﬁlter tilt of 0◦ then becomes a linear gradient across the ﬁeld of view at a ﬁlter of tilt
of

3◦ (see Figure 6 of Ref. 15).

≈
In addition, we were careful to collect ﬂats while the telescope was at the same pointing as the science frames
were collected. By utilizing the Flip-Flats, we were able to collect ﬂats throughout the night, before and after
each science exposure. This is necessary due to ﬂexure in the optical tube assembly, in particular caused by
shifting of the image stabilisation lens in the Canon telephoto lenses and ﬂexure in the connection between the
lens and focuser-camera assembly. Similar to that from varying tilts, this ﬂexure resulted in a shift in the centroid
of the ﬂat-ﬁeld image. While the centroid shift was very small (on order of a few pixels), the resulting additional
source of noise was signiﬁcant.

3.3 Stray Light Contamination

In this narrowband setup, we are extremely sensitive to any sources of scattered light or light leakage through
the optical tube assembly onto the detector. During the observations, we noticed that two strong types of
contaminating light structures appeared in a subset of the data frames on diﬀerent nights. Two example images
showing data contaminated by these two light structures are shown in the left column of Fig. 8. Models of the
background light structure are shown in the right column of Fig. 8. All three of the OTAs in the pathﬁnder
Dragonﬂy Spectral Line Mapper were aﬀected by light contamination to a low level that usually showed up as
a gradient in the images. The structures shown in Fig. 8 are unique in that they are extremely prominent (at
least an order of magnitude larger than typical light contamination in the images) and appeared solely in data
taken with the OTA that had the latest generation of the telephoto lens, the 400mm f/2.8 IS III version. After

Table 4. Instrument surface brightness limit and ﬁeld of view comparisons for the Multi-Unit Spectroscopic Explorer
(MUSE) on ESO’s Very Large Telescope (VLT), the Cosmic Web Imager (CWI) at the Palomar Observatory, the Keck
Cosmic Web Imager (KCWI) at the Keck Observatory, MegaCam imager at the Canada-France-Hawaii Telescope (CFHT),
the Burrell Schmidt Telescope at Kitt Peak National Observatory, and the pathﬁnder and full-scale Dragonﬂy Spectral
Line Mappers (DSLM).

Spatial Scale Exposure FOV

Refs

Instrument

Surface Brightness Limit
(erg cm−2 s−1 arcsec−2)

VLT/MUSE

Palomar/CWI

Keck/KCWI

2.4
1.3
4.8

CFHT/MegaCam 2

Kitt Peak/

Burrell Schmidt

×
3.09

×

×

×

10−19 at 3σ per 3.75˚A 10(cid:48)(cid:48)
10(cid:48)(cid:48)
10−19 at 1σ per 4˚A
1(cid:48)(cid:48)
10−19 at 1σ per 5˚A
3(cid:48)(cid:48)
2(cid:48)

10−18 at 1σ

×
10−18 at 1σ

Pathﬁnder DSLM 5

DSLM

1

10−19 at 3σ
10−19 at 3σ

×

×

4(cid:48)
4(cid:48)

15(cid:48)(cid:48)

−

Time (s)

1 hr

11 hr

3.5 hr

2 hr

900s

32 hr

7 hr

60(cid:48)(cid:48)
40(cid:48)(cid:48)

21

22, 23

20.4(cid:48)(cid:48)

×

60(cid:48)(cid:48)
60(cid:48)(cid:48)
×
33.1(cid:48)(cid:48)
40(cid:48)
1◦

×

×

×
30(cid:48)
1◦

1◦.4
1◦.4

1◦.9
1◦.9

×

×

10

24

25

16

16, this work

further investigation, we determined that at least part of this light contamination was due to faulty baﬄing of
the Filter-Tilter that allowed light to leak into the front of the optics. Indeed, the situation for one of these
prominent light structures (shown in the bottom panels of Fig. 8) resolved itself without any intervention from
the science team, so perhaps it was a hardware issue that was ﬁxed as part of routine servicing of the telescope
by the observatory staﬀ. To address the other large source of light contamination (shown in the top panels of
Fig 8), we carried out an extensive investigation to attempt to pinpoint the location of the light leak inside the
optics. This included switching out every single component of our optical array. We ﬁnally concluded that it was
the telephoto lens itself that was the culprit for causing the light contamination and we hypothesize that this
light leakage is due to removal of shielding material in the telephoto lens allowing infrared emission to penetrate
the lens and enter the optics, where it was then incident upon the detector. To test this theory, we inserted a
UV-IR blocking ﬁlter into the available slot on the telephoto lens, which is at the back of the lens in front of the
camera. This greatly reduced the light contamination in the optics and we were able to recover a clean signal in
the image.

4. COSMIC WEB DETECTORS

In this Section, we return to the earlier discussion of the telescopes and instruments being used to investigate
the intergalactic and circumgalactic media of galaxies. There are now a large number of experiments targeting
these media in the universe, ranging from local observations of galaxies to high redshift observations of quasars.
In this Section, we provide a comparison of these observational techniques and the surface brightness limits they
have reached. Each technique has relative strengths and weaknesses, so a side-by-side comparison allows one to
choose the optimal instrument for speciﬁc observations. In Table 4 we list the ﬁelds of view of several instruments
that have been used to investigate the circumgalactic and/or intergalactic media of galaxies at diﬀerent ranges of
redshift, along with the surface brightness limits reached by these instruments when undertaking these studies.
In addition to instruments with measured surface brightness limits, we have included an estimate of the surface
brightness limits that will be observed with the full Dragonﬂy Spectral Line Mapper. This estimate was calculated
by scaling the pathﬁnder Dragonﬂy Spectral Line Mapper surface brightness limit by both increasing the aperture
of the telescope (40
the size of the pathﬁnder) and reducing the pathﬁnder’s bandpass (0.8 nm compared to the
3 nm bandpass of the pathﬁnder instrument). We predict that the Dragonﬂy Spectral Line Mapper will reach a
10−19 erg cm−2 s−1 arcsec−2 for a 3σ detection over a spatial scale of 4(cid:48) in 7
limiting surface brightness of 1
hours.

×

×

The ﬁelds of view of the instruments listed in Table 4 are displayed in Fig. 9, projected on an image of the

Figure 9. The ﬁelds of view of several instruments used to map the cosmic web as projected onto a false colour image of
NGC 4565 (the Needle Galaxy) taken by the Dragonﬂy Telephoto Array.27 The moon is shown for scale.

NGC 4565 galaxy (NGC 4565 has a radial distance of D
13 Mpc; Ref. 26). This image demonstrates the
complementary nature of the various instruments when targeting structures in the nearby Universe (D < 50
Mpc). Integral ﬁeld units (IFUs) on 8-m class telescopes carry out high angular resolution studies, which are
suited to smaller scale structures, while the wide-ﬁeld imagers such as Dragonﬂy and CFHT MegaCam are suited
to studying larger scale structures such as the galaxy environment.

≈

One tool to measure the survey eﬃciency of an instrument is to calculate the sky survey rate, Γ, which is
deﬁned as the ratio of the observed sky area to the time needed to reach the desired sensitivity.29 We evaluate
the instruments using this scale in Fig. 10, where we have plotted the ﬁelds of view of the instruments against
10−19 erg cm−2 s−1 arcsec−2 with a 3σ detection. The surface
the time required to reach a sensitivity of 1
brightness limits for the values in Fig. 10 are calculated over a spatial scale of 10 arcsec2 and scaled from the
values in Table 4 where necessary. Scaling the detection limits from Nσ to 3σ is straightforward as the surface
brightness limit is calculated from the RMS ﬂuctuations in the sky background, so a simple scaling of 3/N can be
implemented. The required exposure times were scaled from the values in Table 4 by assuming that the signal-
to-noise ratio scales with the square root of the integration time. Creating an equivalent comparison between the
spatial scale is less straightforward, and in this case, the values were scaled empirically using relative amplitudes
from instruments where surface brightness limits calculated at diﬀerent scales exists (e.g., Refs. 28 and 21 provide
two diﬀerent estimates of the sky background observed by the MUSE instrument). This introduces error into
this estimate, which is encompassed by the error bars in the plot.

×

Figure 10. A comparison of the ﬁelds of view of select instruments against the exposure time required to reach a sensitivity
of 10−19 erg cm−2 s−1 arcsec−2 with a 3σ detection. The surface brightness limits are calculated over a spatial scale of 10
arcsec2 for the exposure time estimates. The surface brightness estimates were either taken directly from the literature
or scaled from values in Table 4. We scaled these values empirically using relative numbers from instruments where the
surface brightness limits have been calculated at diﬀerent scales (e.g., Refs. 28 and 21 provide two diﬀerent estimates of
the sky background observed by the MUSE instrument). This introduces error into this estimate, particularly for the
CFHT/MegaCam and Keck/KCWI estimates. Lines of constant survey speed are shown for comparison, where a higher
survey speed value corresponds to a more eﬃcient survey instrument.

Lines of constant survey rate are plotted in Fig. 10 to aid the comparison of the survey eﬃciency of the
instruments. As one may expect, the wide-ﬁeld instruments have the highest survey eﬃciency due to their large
ﬁelds of view. It is necessary that this large ﬁeld of view is accompanied with sensitivity, though, which separates
CFHT/MegaCam and the Dragonﬂy Spectral Line Mapper from the Kitt Peak/Burrell Schmidt instrument. This
plot also shows that when large ﬁelds of view are not important, the IFUs on the larger telescopes are more
eﬃcient for observations, due to the lower exposure times required. There are limits to this comparison, which
include that it does not take into account the spectral range of the IFUs, which adds the third spatial dimension
into the survey, changing it from a survey area into a survey volume. Thus, this speciﬁc comparison is useful
for considering single targets or objects within some ﬁxed cosmological volume. Including the spectral range
of the instruments would boost the survey eﬃciency of the IFUS. Another limitation of this comparison is the
simplicity in calculating the limiting surface brightnesses. Not only is it approximate due to empirical scaling
of sensitivities, but it also does not take into account systematic errors in surface brightness measurements. As
was discussed earlier, Dragonﬂy’s strength is the removal of systematic sources of noise in low surface brightness
imaging, which isn’t considered in this simple surface brightness limit estimate, which is based on the random
noise in the images.

100101102103104105106Time(hr)10−2100102104106108FieldofView(arcmin2)Γ=0.001Γ=0.01Γ=0.1Γ=1Γ=10Γ=100VLT/MUSEPalomar/CWIKeck/KCWIDSLMCFHT/MegaCamKittPeak/BurrellSchmidt5. SUMMARY

We have developed an upgrade to the Dragonﬂy Telephoto Array to implement ultranarrow bandpass imaging
capability on the telescope with the goal of targeting the line emission from the circumgalactic medium around
nearby galaxies, and the brightest pockets of the cosmic web in the local Universe. The Dragonﬂy Filter-Tilter15
was developed to incorporate ultranarrowband ﬁlters on Dragonﬂy, mounting the ﬁlters at the front of the optics
to avoid the degradation of the ﬁlter transmission proﬁle and to enable the rotation of the ﬁlter with respect to the
optical axis. We built the Dragonﬂy Spectral Line Mapper pathﬁnder, which is a 3-unit version of Dragonﬂy with
the Filter-Tilter instrumentation, to test this concept. We carried out an imaging on the M81 group of galaxies
with the pathﬁnder reaching surface brightness limits comparable to those reached by state-of-the-art instruments
on large optical telescopes. The low surface brightness levels reached by the pathﬁnder Dragonﬂy Spectral Line
Mapper forecast what the full Dragonﬂy Spectral Line Mapper will reach. With narrower ﬁlter bandpasses and
more collecting area, we predict that the Dragonﬂy Spectral Line Mapper will reach surface brightness limits
40
×
10−19 erg cm−2 s−1 arcsec−2 on scales of 4(cid:48) in 7 hours. The Dragonﬂy Spectral Line Mapper is under
of 1
construction in a phased timeline, deploying 10 to 30 units at a time in stages. There are currently 10 units of
the Dragonﬂy Spectral Line Mapper on sky, which are being used to carry out commissioning and ﬁlter testing
(see Chen, S., et al. 2022 for further details). This number will increase to 60 units in the fall of 2022, and to
the ﬁnal number of 120 units in the summer of 2023.

×

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We are very grateful to the staﬀ at New Mexico Skies Observatories, without whom this work couldn’t have been
carried out. This work is supported by a Canadian Foundation for Innovation (CFI) grant. We are thankful for
contributions from the Dunlap Institute (funded through an endowment established by the David Dunlap family
and the University of Toronto), the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC),
and the National Science Foundation (NSF), without which this research would not have been possible.

REFERENCES

[1] Matuszewski, M., Chang, D., Crabill, R. M., Martin, D. C., Moore, A. M., Morrissey, P., and Rahman, S.,
“The Cosmic Web Imager: an integral ﬁeld spectrograph for the Hale Telescope at Palomar Observatory:
instrument design and ﬁrst results,” in [Ground-based and Airborne Instrumentation for Astronomy III ],
Proceedings of the SPIE 7735, 77350P (July 2010).

[2] Morrissey, P., Matuszewski, M., Martin, C., Moore, A., Adkins, S., Epps, H., Bartos, R., Cabak, J., Cowley,
D., Davis, J., Delacroix, A., Fucik, J., Hilliard, D., James, E., Kaye, S., Lingner, N., Neill, J. D., Pistor,
C., Phillips, D., Rockosi, C., and Weber, B., “The Keck Cosmic Web Imager: a capable new integral
ﬁeld spectrograph for the W. M. Keck Observatory,” in [Ground-based and Airborne Instrumentation for
Astronomy IV], Proceedings of the SPIE 8446, 844613 (Sept. 2012).

[3] Morrissey, P., Matuszewski, M., Martin, D. C., Neill, J. D., Epps, H., Fucik, J., Weber, B., Darvish, B.,
Adkins, S., Allen, S., Bartos, R., Belicki, J., Cabak, J., Callahan, S., Cowley, D., Crabill, M., Deich, W.,
Delecroix, A., Doppman, G., Hilyard, D., James, E., Kaye, S., Kokorowski, M., Kwok, S., Lanclos, K.,
Milner, S., Moore, A., O’Sullivan, D., Parihar, P., Park, S., Phillips, A., Rizzi, L., Rockosi, C., Rodriguez,
H., Salaun, Y., Seaman, K., Sheikh, D., Weiss, J., and Zarzaca, R., “The Keck Cosmic Web Imager Integral
Field Spectrograph,” Astrophysical Journal 864, 93 (Sept. 2018).

[4] Bacon, R., Bauer, S., Brau-Nogu´e, S., Caillier, P., Capoani, L., Carollo, M., Contini, T., Daguis´e, E.,
Delabre, B., Dreizler, S., Dubois, J. P., Dupieux, M., Dupin, J., Emsellem, E., Ferruit, P., Francois, M.,
Franx, M., Gallou, G., Gerssen, J., Guiderdoni, B., Hansali, G., Hofmann, D., Jarno, A., Kelz, A., Koehler,
C., Kollatschny, W., Kosmalski, J., Laurent, F., Lilly, S., Lizon, J., Loupias, M., Monstein, C., Moultaka, J.,
Nicklas, H., Par´es, L., Pasquini, L., Pecontal, A., Pello, R., Petit, C., Manescau, A., Reiss, R., Remillieux,
A., Renault, E., Roth, M., Schaye, J., Steinmetz, M., Str¨obele, S., Stuik, R., Weilbacher, P., Wisotzki,
L., and Wozniak, H., “New Science Opportunities Oﬀered by MUSE,” Astrophysics and Space Science
Proceedings 9, 331 (2009).

[5] Arrigoni Battaia, F., Obreja, A., Prochaska, J. X., Hennawi, J. F., Rahmani, H., Ba˜nados, E., Farina, E. P.,
3 quasars,” Astronomy

Cai, Z., and Man, A., “Discovery of intergalactic bridges connecting two faint z
and Astrophysics 631, A18 (Nov. 2019).

∼

[6] Leclercq, F., Verhamme, A., Epinat, B., Simmonds, C., Matthee, J., Bouch´e, N. F., Garel, T., Urrutia,
T., Wisotzki, L., Zabl, J., Bacon, R., Abril-Melgarejo, V., Boogaard, L., Brinchmann, J., Cantalupo, S.,
Contini, T., Kerutt, J., Kusakabe, H., Maseda, M., Michel-Dansac, L., Muzahid, S., Nanayakkara, T.,
Richard, J., and Schaye, J., “The MUSE Extremely Deep Field: a ﬁrst panoramic view of an Mg II emitting
intragroup medium,” arXiv e-prints , arXiv:2203.05614 (Mar. 2022).

[7] Bordoloi, R., O’Meara, J. M., Sharon, K., Rigby, J. R., Cooke, J., Shaban, A., Matuszewski, M., Rizzi, L.,
Doppmann, G., Martin, D. C., Moore, A. M., Morrissey, P., and Neill, J. D., “Resolving the H I in damped
Lyman α systems that power star formation,” Nature 606, 59–63 (May 2022).

[8] Cai, Z., Hamden, E., Matuszewski, M., Prochaska, J. X., Li, Q., Cantalupo, S., Arrigoni Battaia, F.,
Martin, C., Neill, J. D., O’Sullivan, D., Wang, R., Moore, A., and Morrissey, P., “Keck/Palomar Cosmic
Web Imagers (KCWI/PCWI) Reveal an Enormous Lyα Nebula in an Extremely Overdense QSO Pair Field
at z = 2.45,” ArXiv e-prints (Mar. 2018).

[9] Lau, M. W., Hamann, F., Gillette, J., Perrotta, S., Rupke, D. S. N., Wylezalek, D., and Zakamska, N. L.,
“Probing the Inner Circumgalactic Medium and Quasar Illumination around the Reddest ‘Extremely Red
Quasar’ (ERQ),” arXiv e-prints , arXiv:2203.06203 (Mar. 2022).

[10] Burchett, J. N., Rubin, K. H. R., Prochaska, J. X., Coil, A. L., Vaught, R. R., and Hennawi, J. F., “Cir-
cumgalactic Mg II Emission from an Isotropic Starburst Galaxy Outﬂow Mapped by KCWI,” Astrophysical
Journal 909, 151 (Mar. 2021).

[11] Rupke, D. S. N., Coil, A., Geach, J. E., Tremonti, C., Diamond-Stanic, A. M., George, E. R., Hickox, R. C.,
Kepley, A. A., Leung, G., Moustakas, J., Rudnick, G., and Sell, P. H., “A 100-kiloparsec wind feeding the
circumgalactic medium of a massive compact galaxy,” Nature 574, 643–646 (Oct. 2019).

[12] Cai, Z., Cantalupo, S., Prochaska, J. X., Arrigoni Battaia, F., Burchett, J., Li, Q., Chisholm, J., Bundy, K.,
and Hennawi, J. F., “Evolution of the Cool Gas in the Circumgalactic Medium of Massive Halos: A Keck
Cosmic Web Imager Survey of Lyα Emission around QSOs at z
2,” Astrophysical Journal, Supplement 245,
23 (Dec. 2019).

≈

[13] Lokhorst, D., Abraham, R., van Dokkum, P., Wijers, N., and Schaye, J., “On the Detectability of Visible-
wavelength Line Emission from the Local Circumgalactic and Intergalactic Medium,” Astrophysical Jour-
nal 877, 4 (May 2019).

[14] Abraham, R. G. and van Dokkum, P. G., “Ultra-Low Surface Brightness Imaging with the Dragonﬂy

Telephoto Array,” Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc 126, 55–69 (Jan. 2014).

[15] Lokhorst, D. M., Abraham, R. G., van Dokkum, P., and Chen, S., “Wide-ﬁeld ultra-narrow-bandpass imag-
ing with the Dragonﬂy Telephoto Array,” in [Ground-based and Airborne Instrumentation for Astronomy
VIII], Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series 11445, 1144527 (Dec.
2020).

[16] Lokhorst, D., Abraham, R., Pasha, I., van Dokkum, P., Chen, S., Miller, T., Danieli, S., Greco, J., Zhang,
J., Merritt, A., and Conroy, C., “A Giant Shell of Ionized Gas Discovered near M82 with the Dragonﬂy
Spectral Line Mapper Pathﬁnder,” Astrophysical Journal 927, 136 (Mar. 2022).

[17] Danieli, S., Lokhorst, D., Zhang, J., Merritt, A., van Dokkum, P., Abraham, R., Conroy, C., Gilhuly, C.,
Greco, J., Janssens, S., Li, J., Liu, Q., Miller, T. B., and Mowla, L., “The Dragonﬂy Wide Field Survey. I.
Telescope, Survey Design, and Data Characterization,” Astrophysical Journal 894, 119 (May 2020).
[18] Devine, D. and Bally, J., “Hα Emission 11 Kiloparsecs above M82,” Astrophysical Journal 510, 197–204

(Jan. 1999).

[19] Lehnert, M. D., Heckman, T. M., and Weaver, K. A., “Very Extended X-Ray and Hα Emission in M82:

Implications for the Superwind Phenomenon,” Astrophysical Journal 523, 575–584 (Oct. 1999).

[20] Pasha, I., Lokhorst, D., van Dokkum, P. G., Chen, S., Abraham, R., Greco, J., Danieli, S., Miller, T.,
Lippitt, E., Polzin, A., Shen, Z., Keim, M. A., Liu, Q., Merritt, A., and Zhang, J., “A Nascent Tidal Dwarf
Galaxy Forming within the Northern H I Streamer of M82,” Astrophysical Journal, Letters 923, L21 (Dec.
2021).

[21] Sanchez Almeida, J., Calhau, J., Munoz-Tunon, C., Gonzalez-Moran, A. L., and Rodriguez-Espinosa, J. M.,
“Discovery of faint double-peak Halpha emission in the halo of low redshift galaxies,” arXiv e-prints ,
arXiv:2205.12782 (May 2022).

[22] Martin, D. C., Chang, D., Matuszewski, M., Morrissey, P., Rahman, S., Moore, A., and Steidel, C. C.,
“Intergalactic Medium Emission Observations with the Cosmic Web Imager. I. The Circum-QSO Medium
of QSO 1549+19, and Evidence for a Filamentary Gas Inﬂow,” Astrophysical Journal 786, 106 (May 2014).
[23] Martin, D. C., Chang, D., Matuszewski, M., Morrissey, P., Rahman, S., Moore, A., Steidel, C. C., and
Matsuda, Y., “Intergalactic Medium Emission Observations with the Cosmic Web Imager. II. Discovery
of Extended, Kinematically Linked Emission around SSA22 Lyα Blob 2,” Astrophysical Journal 786, 107
(May 2014).

[24] Boselli, A., Lupi, A., Epinat, B., Amram, P., Fossati, M., Anderson, J. P., Boissier, S., Boquien, M.,
Consolandi, G., Cˆot´e, P., Cuillandre, J. C., Ferrarese, L., Galbany, L., Gavazzi, G., G´omez-L´opez, J. A.,
Gwyn, S., Hensler, G., Hutchings, J., Kuncarayakti, H., Longobardi, A., Peng, E. W., Plana, H., Postma,
J., Roediger, J., Roehlly, Y., Schimd, C., Trinchieri, G., and Vollmer, B., “A Virgo Environmental Survey
Tracing Ionised Gas Emission (VESTIGE). IX. The eﬀects of ram pressure stripping down to the scale of
individual HII regions in the dwarf galaxy IC 3476,” Astronomy and Astrophysics 646, A139 (Feb. 2021).
[25] Donahue, M., Aldering, G., and Stocke, J. T., “Low Surface Brightness H alpha Observations of Local

Intergalactic Hydrogen Clouds,” Astrophysical Journal, Letters 450, L45 (Sept. 1995).

[26] Tully, R. B., Courtois, H. M., and Sorce, J. G., “Cosmicﬂows-3,” Astronomical Journal 152, 50 (Aug. 2016).
[27] Gilhuly, C., Hendel, D., Merritt, A., Abraham, R., Danieli, S., Lokhorst, D., Liu, Q., van Dokkum, P.,
Conroy, C., and Greco, J., “The Dragonﬂy Edge-on Galaxies Survey: Shaping the Outer disk of NGC 4565
via Accretion,” Astrophysical Journal 897, 108 (July 2020).

[28] Bacon, R., Mary, D., Garel, T., Blaizot, J., Maseda, M., Schaye, J., Wisotzki, L., Conseil, S., Brinchmann,
J., Leclercq, F., Abril-Melgarejo, V., Boogaard, L., Bouch´e, N. F., Contini, T., Feltre, A., Guiderdoni, B.,
Herenz, C., Kollatschny, W., Kusakabe, H., Matthee, J., Michel-Dansac, L., Nanayakkara, T., Richard, J.,
Roth, M., Schmidt, K. B., Steinmetz, M., Tresse, L., Urrutia, T., Verhamme, A., Weilbacher, P. M., Zabl,
J., and Zoutendijk, S. L., “The MUSE Extremely Deep Field: The cosmic web in emission at high redshift,”
Astronomy and Astrophysics 647, A107 (Mar. 2021).

[29] Terebizh, V. Y., “New designs of survey telescopes,” Astronomische Nachrichten 332, 714–742 (Aug. 2011).

