Crowd-Funded Earthquake Early-Warning System 

Hudson Kaleb Dy  

                            Research Associate 

 Hsi-Jen James Yeh, Ph.D. 

      Associate Professor 

Walnut Valley Research Institute 

Department of Engineering & Computer Science 

  Azusa Pacific University 

Abstract—Earthquake 

early  warning 

The  software  developed  for  this  project 

systems  has  been  proven  to  save  countless 

converts  these  smartphones  into  dedicated 

lives  in  Japan,  Mexico,  and  Chile,  where 

seismometers 

and  uses 

existing  web 

earthquake warnings are often broadcast live 

technologies  for  telemetry  services.  This 

on  TV  up  to  a  minute  before  residents 

system would also trigger alerts to all devices 

experience shaking. 

that  has  the  software  installed  whenever  a 

Unfortunately,  traditional  early  warning 

systems require extensive capital investment. 

The high cost of traditional earthquake early-

tremor  is  detected,  effectively  making  each 

seismic  detection  station  double  as  an 

earthquake early-warning alarm. 

warning systems and limited budgets prevent 

A large network of these seismic detection 

earthquake-prone  developing  countries  like 

stations  will  effectively  create  an  affordable 

the  Philippines, 

Indonesia,  Afghanistan, 

earthquake early-warning system that can be 

India,  Burma,  Ghana,  Nigeria,  Columbia, 

rapidly implemented at an extremely low cost. 

Venezuela,  and  Bolivia 

from  building 

It  would  provide  developing  nations  an 

traditional earthquake warning systems. 

affordable life-saving alternative to expensive 

This  project  describes  repurposing  old 

Android 

smartphones 

into 

affordable 

dedicated  seismometers  to  detect  tremors. 

These  smartphones  have  become  disposable 

items  and  are  continuously  "upgraded"  and 

replaced.  Yet  every  one  of  these  devices 

includes  everything  needed  to  act  as  a 

dedicated  seismometer:  Wi-Fi  capability, 

GPS, and an accelerometer. 

traditional 

earthquake 

early-warning 

systems.  This  solution  is  cheap,  keeps  old 

smartphones  from  landfills,  and  will  save 

lives.  (Abstract) 

Keywords—  Earthquake, 

tremors, 

early-

warning 

systems,  Android, 

smartphones, 

accelerometer,  GPS,  Apache  Web  Server, 

MySQL database server. (keywords) 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I. 

INTRODUCTION 

network of seismometers, plus  another USD 20.5 

When  an  earthquake  occurs,  several  types  of 

seismic  waves  are  generated  from  the  epicenter. 

These include less destructive but fast-moving P-

wave  (primary  waves)  [1]  as  well  as  more 

destructive but slower moving S-waves (secondary 

waves).  

million 

for 

telemetry[2][3][4]. 

Annual 

maintenance costs of the network of seismometers 

is USD 28.6 million per year, plus USD 9.8 million 

for the telemetry system. The total implementation 

cost to operate the USGS ShakeAlert system for the 

first year is USD 98.3 million (USD 59.9 million + 

Earthquake  early-warning  systems  work  by 

USD 38.4 million.)  

distributing 

seismic  detection 

station 

in  a 

widespread  area[1].  When  an  earthquake  occurs, 

the detection stations closest to the epicenter will 

detect  the  fast-moving  P-waves  to  warn  of  the 

This project is an attempt to bridge the gap and 

provide  a  crowd-funded  affordable  solution  for 

earthquake-prone developing countries. 

impending 

destructive 

S-waves.  Although 

To  reduce  cost,  this  project  repurposes  old 

residents located closer to the epicenter will have 

Android  smartphones  into  affordable  dedicated 

little if any advance warning, those located further 

seismometers to detect tremors. These smartphones 

will have critical seconds, and sometimes minutes, 

have 

become 

disposable 

items 

and 

are 

to brace for the shaking. It would give people who 

continuously  "upgraded"  and  replaced.  USA 

live  in  seismically  vulnerable  structures  or  in 

disposes 151 million cellphones per year. [17] Yet 

tsunami  prone  areas  extra  time  to  move  to  safter 

every  one  of  these  devices  includes  everything 

areas.  

needed  to  act  as  a  dedicated  seismometer:  Wi-Fi 

Earthquake  early  warning  systems  has  been 

capability,  GPS,  and  an  accelerometer.  A 

proven  to  save  countless  lives  in  Japan,  Mexico, 

secondary  benefit  of  this  project  is  the  ability  to 

and  Chile,  where  earthquake  warnings  are  often 

reuse these old cellphones and prevent them from 

broadcast  live  on  TV  up  to  a  minute  before 

going into landfills. 

residents experience shaking.[5][6][15] 

Unfortunately,  these  systems  are  notoriously 

absent  in  developing  nations  because  of  the  high 

II.  SEISMIC DETECTION STATIONS 

cost  of 

traditional  earthquake  early-warning 

The  current  standard  of  building  a  traditional 

systems. [12][14][16]With one of the highest GDP 

earthquake  early-warning  system  involves  setting 

per capita in the world, it took until May 2021 for 

up  dedicated  seismic  detection  stations.  It  would 

the US west coast to finally have a working system 

involve  leasing  space,  providing  power,  and 

even with a big earthquake long overdue.[10][11] 

building  a  telemetry  system  for  the  seismic 

This system is called the USGS ShakeAlert system 

detection  station  to  communicate  with  the  rest  of 

which  cost  USD  39.4  million  to  implement  the 

the  system.  A  central  server  that  processes  these 

 
 
signals from each remote detection station is then 

2)  A  server  component  that  comprises  a  Linux 

used to validate if an earthquake occurs or if it is a 

Apache  web  server  and  several  server-side 

false signal.  

PHP scripts. 

3)  A  MySQL  server  that  is  accessible  from  the 

This  project 

leverages  existing  WiFi  and 

web  server.  This  stores  all  reported  shaking 

internet  connectivity  in  most  homes  to  eliminate 

events,  the  time  of  the  event,  and  the  GPS 

the  telemetry  costs.  In  the  case  of  the  USGS 

location.  A  unique  ID  will  be  automatically 

ShakeAlert  system,  this  cost  $20,000,000  for  the 

generated and maintained for each device. 

buildout,  plus  $9,800,000  annual  expenses.  Our 

system would be mounted on existing load bearing 

By  having  a  large  network  of  old  Android 

walls  of  homes  and  other  existing  buildings  with 

smartphones  running  the  software  application 

double-sided tape using a crowd-funded approach. 

developed 

for 

this  project  and  distributed 

This  would  also  eliminate  construction  costs  and 

geographically in an earthquake prone region, this 

land  acquisition  costs.  In  the  case  of  USGS 

system should work and operate similarly to more 

ShakeAlert  system,  this  was  $39,000,000  for  the 

expensive  traditional  earthquake  early-warning 

initial buildout, plus $28,600,000 annual expenses.  

systems.  

III.  COMPONENTS 

A.  Android Smartphone 

The crowd-funded earthquake-early warning 

The Smartphones will be required to connect to an 

system consists of the following elements:  

existing WiFi connection and plugged in to the wall 

outlet using the original device charger. This will 

1)  An  Android  application  software  specifically 

ensure  that  the  device  will  stay  continuously 

created for this project. This is an Android Java 

powered. It will also be attached to a load-bearing 

application written in Android Studio that will 

wall using double-sided tape. Lastly, the Android 

convert 

the 

phones 

into 

dedicated 

Software  Application  developed  for  this  project 

seismometers when it is installed in an Android 

shall be installed into the device.  

smartphone. 

  These  devices  would  be 

permanently plugged into a power outlet using 

B.  Android Software Application 

the original device charger and mounted on a 

When  installed  in  an  Android  smartphone,  the 

load-bearing wall of the building using double-

application  will  detect  ground  shaking  by 

sided tape.  

monitoring the accelerometers in the smartphones.  

It  will  also  gather  the  device’s  latitutde  and 

longitude  (physical  location)  using  the  device’s 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GPS.  Tremors  detected  will  be  reported  to  the 

E.  MySQL Server 

server by calling the PHP scripts. The reported data 

The  database  is  used  to  quickly  verify  if  nearby 

will include information such as the amplitude of 

stations  has  detected  similar  tremors  without 

the shaking detected, the time and the physical GPS 

maintaining  dedicated  connections  to  individual 

location of the device. 

C.  PHP Server-Side Scripting 

Upon receipt of a reported tremor, the server will 

store the amplitude, time, and GPS location on the 

MySQL database. It will then proceed to perform a 

simple  validation  procedure  to  determine  if  the 

shaking was the result of a tremor or just a localized 

anomaly (like passing trucks causing a vibration). 

Android  devices.  This  is  crucial  to  allowing  the 

system to scale. It also allows us to further tune the 

system  by  increasing  or  decreasing  the  threshold 

required, whether it is with regards to the intensity 

of  shaking  (amplitude  of  detected  shaking  in 

accelerometer) or the required number of stations 

that has detecting shaking, before raising an alarm 

of an impending tremor to all users.  

This  validation  is  done  by  looking  for  nearby 

IV.  METHODS AND RESULTS 

devices  and  checking  if  they  reported  a  similar 

tremor. If the reported tremor passes validation, the 

server-side script will send out a notification using 

Google’s Firebase Cloud Messaging Notifications 

to all devices with the same application installed to 

warn of a pending earthquake. 

The prototype that was built is fully functional 

and  has  demonstrated  to  work  well  when  tested 

with 3 devices. For our initial test, because we are 

lacking  sufficient  test  devices,  the  validation 

procedure has been automatically disabled until the 

number of devices with our software installed  hit 

50 units.  

D.  Google FCM Notifications 

Because  the  built-in  accelerometers  in  the 

Google FCM Notifications are used to notify users 

cellphones are incredibly sensitive and was able to 

of a pending large tremor. While users closer to the 

pick  up  a  lot  of  environmental  shaking  such  as 

epicenter  will  not  receive  advance  notifications, 

when  large  trucks  pass  by  the  building  structure. 

users located further away will  benefit by getting 

Initial version of the program reported all shaking 

advance warning. Google FCM ensures is free and 

to  the  server  but  resulted  in  many  false  positive 

ensures  that  95%  of  users  will  receive  the 

tremor  reports.  A  modified  version  of 

the 

notification  within  250ms  and  has  very  low 

application  has  filtered  this  small  environmental 

bandwidth requirements. [17] 

background activity and will only report moderate 

or severe shaking. 

 
 
 
  
 
 
Figure 1: Screenshot of minor shaking detected by 

Figure 3: Moderate shaking detected by device 

device. These are residual environmental shaking 

which are reported to the server. This is a 

and are not reported to the server. No Earthquake 

screenshot after the shaking report was sent to the 

warning received from the server in the last 5 min. 

server and the earthquake warning received back 

from the server. An audible alarm is also triggered 

on every device. 

Figure 2: Moderate shaking detected by device 

which are reported to the server. This shaking is 

sent to the server, but this screenshot was taken 

right before the earthquake warning has been 

received back from the server. 

Figure 4: Screenshot of another device showing 

no shaking detected locally, but an Earthquake 

warning was received from the server which is 

shown on screen. An audible alarm is also 

triggered on every device. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The system would also become more effective 

as 

the  number  of  dedicated  seismometers 

(repurposed Android cellphones with the software 

installed) grow. This would need to occur to make 

the system and viable. Once the installed user base 

grows  sufficiently,  this  system  could  conceivably 

be  in  TV  and  radio  broadcast  stations  to  stream 

warnings to the public at large.  

Once  there  are  enough  dedicated  seismic 

detection stations in place, another version of this 

software  could  also  be  created  that  only  receives 

Figure 5: Extreme shaking detected locally and 

warning  alarms  to  send  the  alert  to  everyone  on 

sent to the server. This is a screenshot after the 

their  cellphones.  This  system  could  also  be 

shaking report was sent to the server and the 

integrated into the public emergency alert systems 

earthquake warning received back from the server. 

to broadcast warnings and alarms to people without 

An audible alarm is also triggered on every 

cellphones.  Making  the  system  crowd-funded 

should  allow  the  system  to  rapidly  increase  in 

numbers  and  its  ability  to  sufficiently  detect 

earthquakes  in  an  affordable  way  which  will  be 

very  important  in  socio-economically  challenged 

developing countries. 

VI.  CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 

The  goal  is  to  continue  the  project  by  finding 

partners to implement the system on a country-by-

country  basis.  A  GoFundMe  fundraiser  has  been 

created with the hope of raising funds for the first 

50 seismic detection stations in the Philippines.  

device. 

V.  DISCUSSION 

All  software  has  been  developed  with  the 

completed  user  interface  and  the  system  fully 

functional.  There  amount  of  shaking  are  roughly 

differentiated  and  grouped  according  to  “Minor 

Shaking”,  “Moderate  Shaking”  and  “Substantial 

Shaking.” Although these are sufficient to provide 

warning 

alerts  of 

a  pending 

earthquake, 

improvements could be made to be more indicative 

of the magnitude of the earthquake like traditional 

earthquake  early-warning  systems.    In  order  to 

improve  the  system  to  do  so,  additional  work  to 

calibrate  different 

types  of  phones  and 

the 

sensitivity of the accelerometers would need to be 

completed.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 

http://pubs.er.usgs.gov/publication/ofr201811

[1] Heaton, Thomas H., (1985, May). A Model for 

55 

a Seismic Computerized Alert Network. 

[4] Tajima, F., Hayashida, T. Earthquake early 

Science (Vol 228, Issue 4702 pp. 987-990). 

warning: what does “seconds before a strong 

doi: 10.1126/science.228.4702.987 

hit” mean?. Prog Earth Planet Sci 5, 63 

[2] Given, D.D., Allen, R.M., Baltay, A.S., Bodin, 

(2018). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/s40645-

P., Cochran, E.S., Creager, K., de Groot, 

018-0221-6 

R.M., Gee, L.S., Hauksson, E., Heaton, T.H., 

[5] Kodera Y, Hayashimoto N, Tamaribuchi K, 

Hellweg, M., Murray, J.R., Thomas, V.I., 

Noguchi K, Moriwaki K, Takahashi R, 

Toomey, D., and Yelin, T.S., 2018, Revised 

Morimoto M, Okamoto K and Hoshiba M 

technical implementation plan for the 

(2021) Developments of the Nationwide 

ShakeAlert system—An earthquake early 

Earthquake Early Warning System in Japan 

warning system for the West Coast of the 

After the 2011 Mw9.0 Tohoku-Oki 

United States: U.S. Geological Survey Open-

Earthquake. Front. Earth Sci. 9:726045. doi: 

File Report 2018–1155, 42 p., 

10.3389/feart.2021.726045 

https://doi.org/10.3133/ofr20181155. 

[6] Miguel Medina, Rodrigo Sanchez, Sebastián 

[3] Rowan, Linda R., (2022, June 1) The 

Riquelme, Maria C. Flores, Pablo Koch, 

ShakeAlert Earthquake Early Warning System 

Francisco Bravo, Sergio Barrientos, Ivan 

and the Federal Role. Congressional Research 

Henson, Angela Chung, Diego Melgar, 

Service (R47121)  

[4] Given, Douglas D.,Allen, Richard M.,Baltay, 

Annemarie S.,Bodin, Paul,Cochran, Elizabeth 

S.,Creager, Kenneth,de Groot, Robert M.,Gee, 

Lind S.,Hauksson, Egill,Heaton, Thomas 

Constantino Mpodozis, Margaret Hellweg, 

Richard Allen; An Earthquake Early Warning 

System for Northern Chile Based on ElarmS‐

3. Seismological Research Letters 2022; doi: 

https://doi.org/10.1785/0220210331 

H.,Hellweg, Margaret,Murray, Jessica 

[7] Minson, S.E., Baltay, A.S., Cochran, E.S. et al. 

R.,Thomas, Valerie I.,Toomey, 

The Limits of Earthquake Early Warning 

Douglas,Yelin, Thomas S. (2018) Revised 

Accuracy and Best Alerting Strategy. Sci Rep 

technical implementation plan for the 

9, 2478 (2019). doi: 

ShakeAlert system—An earthquake early 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-39384-y 

warning system for the West Coast of the 

[8] Sara K. McBride, Hollie Smith, Meredith 

United States. USGS Publications Warehouse 

Morgoch, Danielle Sumy, Mariah Jenkins, 

(2018 10.3133/ofr20181155). DOI: 

Lori Peek, Ann Bostrom, Dare Baldwin, 

Elizabeth Reddy, Robert de Groot, Julia 

 
Becker, David Johnston, and Michele Wood, 

and J. Zschau (Editors), Springer, Berlin, 

(2022), "Evidence-based guidelines for 

Germany, 49–69. 

protective actions and earthquake early 

[14] Aguirre-Ayerbe, I., Merino, M., Aye, S. L., 

warning systems," GEOPHYSICS 87: WA77-

Dissanayake, R., Shadiya, F., Lopez, C. M. 

WA102. doi: https://doi.org/10.1190/geo2021-

(Oct 2022) An evaluation of availability and 

0222.1 

adequacy of Multi-Hazard Early Warning 

[9] Wu, Y.-M., Mittal, H., Chen, D.-Y., Hsu, T.-

Systems in Asian countries: A baseline study. 

Y., & Lin, P.-Y. (2021). Earthquake Early 

International Journal of Disaster Risk 

Warning Systems in Taiwan: Current Status. 

Reduction (Vol 49, 101749-2020 2012-4209). 

Journal of the Geological Society of India, 

doi: 

97(12), 1525-1532. doi:10.1007/s12594-021-

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2020.101749 

1909-6 

[15] Suarez, G., D. Novelo, and E. Mansilla 

[10] Voosen, P. (Nov 1, 2018). California's new 

(2009). Performance evaluation of the seismic 

earthquake warnings deliver critical seconds 

alert system (SAS) in Mexico City: A 

of notice, Science. doi: 

10.1126/science.aav9003 

seismological and a social perspective, 

Seismol. Res. Lett. 80, 707–716. 

[11] Nordrurn, Amy (Feb 6, 2014). Who will pay 

[16] Nakamura, Y. (2008). First actual P-wave 

for an Earthquake Warning System on the 

alarm systems and examples of disaster 

West Coast? Scientific American. doi: 

prevention by them, 14th World Conference 

https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/w

on Earthquake Engineering, Beijing, China, 

ho-will-pay-for-an-earthquake-warning-

12–17 October 2008 

system-on-the-west-coast/ 

[16] Proctor, N. (Dec 2018). Americans Toss 151 

[12] Allen, R. M., P. Gasparini, O. Kamigaichi, 

Million Phones A Year. What If We Could 

and M. Bose (2009). The status of earthquake 

Repair Them Instead? Cognoscenti. doi: 

early warning around the world: An 

https://www.wbur.org/cognoscenti/2018/12/1

introductory overview, Seismol. Res. Lett. 80, 

1/right-to-repair-nathan-proctor 

682–693. 

[17] Firebase Documentation, About FCM 

[13] Bose, M., R. M. Allen, H. Brown, G. Gua, M. 

Messages. doi: 

Fischer, E. Hauksson, T.Heaton, M. Hellweg, 

https://firebase.google.com/docs/cloud-

M. Liukis, D. Neuhauser, et al. (2014). CISN 

messaging/concept-options 

ShakeAlert: An earthquake early warning 

demonstration system for California, in Early 

Warning for Geological Disasters, F. Wenzel 

 
 
 
