IEEE 802.11ad Based Joint Radar Communication
Transceiver: Design, Prototype and Performance
Analysis

Akanksha Sneh, Soumya Jain, V Sri Sindhu, Shobha Sundar Ram, Senior Member IEEE, and Sumit Darak

1

2
2
0
2

p
e
S
9

]
P
S
.
s
s
e
e
[

1
v
5
3
2
4
0
.
9
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

enables beam alignment at

Abstract—Rapid beam alignment is required to support high
gain millimeter wave (mmW) communication links between
a base station (BS) and mobile users (MU). The standard
IEEE 802.11ad protocol
the
BS and MU through a lengthy beam training procedure
accomplished through additional packet overhead. However, this
results in reduced latency and throughput. Auxiliary radar
functionality embedded within the communication protocol
has been proposed in prior literature to enable rapid beam
alignment of communication beams without the requirement
of channel overheads. In this work, we propose a complete
architectural framework of a joint radar-communication wireless
transceiver wherein radar based detection of MU is realized to
enable subsequent narrow beam communication. We provide
a software prototype implementation with transceiver design
details, signal models and signal processing algorithms. The
prototype is experimentally evaluated with realistic simulations in
free space and Rician propagation conditions and demonstrated
to accelerate the beam alignment by a factor of four while
reducing the overall bit error rate (BER) resulting in signiﬁcant
improvement in throughput with respect to standard 802.11ad.
Likewise, the radar performance is found to be comparable to
commonly used mmW radars.

Index Terms—joint radar-communication, IEEE 802.11ad,
communication, beam

transceiver design, millimeter wave
alignment

sensing for

routes. This

I. INTRODUCTION
An overarching objective of next generation intelligent
transportation systems is to enable vehicle-to-everything
(V2X) capabilities along key transport
is
road and vehicle information
to encourage sharing of
pertaining to environmental
reducing road
fatalities, and improving driving conditions eventually leading
to autonomous driving [1]. Currently, three modes of vehicular
communications have been identiﬁed: dedicated short-range
communication services (DSRC) on IEEE 802.11p based
wireless technology [2]; device-to-device (D2D) based V2X
communications in long-term evolution (LTE) [3], and cellular
LTE-V2X communications [4]. All three modes operate in
sub-6 GHz spectrum; are restricted to tens of Megabits per
second (Mbps) data rates and offer latency of the order
of several hundred milliseconds (ms). However, sharing of
time-critical high deﬁnition three-dimensional environmental
maps of congested road conditions between vehicles requires
Gigabits per second (Gbps) data rates and ultra-low latency.
Millimeter wave (mmW) unlicensed spectrum (above 24
GHz) offers a viable solution for high bandwidth connected
vehicles [5]. However, there are major challenges associated
with the practical deployment of mmW transceivers. Due

All

authors

are with

the

Technology
{soumya20325,sri20326,akankshas,sumit, shobha}@iiitd.ac.in.

110020

Delhi,

New

Indraprastha
Delhi

Institute

of
India.

Information
E-mail:

to the high propagation loss at
these carrier frequencies,
they are meant to operate in short-range line-of-sight (LOS)
conditions with highly directional beams realized through
beamforming. In high mobility environments, rapid beam
training and management result
in considerable overhead
and signiﬁcant deterioration of latency [6]. Alternatively,
auxiliary sensors such as GPS or standalone radars can aid in
beam alignment of the communication systems [7]. However,
the deployment of auxiliary sensors increases the cost and
complexity in terms of synchronization and data processing
as well as poses challenges in terms of interference. In this
work, we propose to augment radar functionality within the
communications transceiver to enable rapid beam alignment
of the communication beams.

Joint

radar communication (JRC)

systems have been
extensively explored over
the last several decades over
three broad paradigms. The ﬁrst set of works considered
the coexistence of radar and communications systems on a
common spectrum prompted by RF congestion issues [8–11].
Here, the main objective is to mitigate the mutual interference
between the two systems with [9] or without cooperation
[10]. Examples include communication systems that operate
as cognitive radio on federally allocated radar bands [11]; or
cognitive radar that operates on communication bands [12]. In
the second paradigm, passive radar receivers are developed
and deployed with communication transmitters serving as
opportunistic illuminators for surveillance and remote sensing
applications [13]. In the third paradigm, RF front ends -
sharing spectrum and hardware - are co-designed for both
radar sensing and communication functionalities [14, 15]. Here
the communication signals are embedded within a traditional
radar framework [16, 17] or the radar signals are embedded
within the communication uplink or downlink signals [18]. In
the other frameworks, either communication or the radar signal
is treated as an interference signal or an uncooperative channel
[19] and hence the functionality of the two systems is not
fully exploited as in the co-design approach. Our work focuses
on co-design of an IEEE 802.11ad based dual-functional
transceiver that is capable of joint radar remote sensing and
communications.

layer

(MAC) and physical

The IEEE 802.11ad standard speciﬁes the media access
control
(PHY) protocols for
implementing wireless local area networks through high data
rate short range directional communication in the mmW
spectrum [20]. Preliminary studies have demonstrated the
effectiveness of JRC implemented upon IEEE 802.11ad for
dynamic target tracking [21–23]. In [21], the authors proposed
a method of using the IEEE 802.11ad beamforming training
the authors
protocol for detecting radar targets. In [24],
leveraged the high data rate (1.76GSa/s) and the Golay

 
 
 
 
 
 
radar

sequences within the channel estimation ﬁelds of the single
carrier preamble in the IEEE 802.11ad packet to demonstrate
radar ranging with ﬁne range resolution and low sidelobes
of a single point target. The authors in [23, 25] proposed
a modiﬁcation to the preamble structure to enable Doppler
resilient
ranging of extended dynamic automotive
targets. All of these works focused on developing radar
signal processing algorithms without complete architectural
details of the JRC transceivers and system-level performance
analysis. Further, these works make assumptions on the radar
waveform that would introduce signiﬁcant limitations on the
performance of the joint transceiver in realistic conditions.
From a prototype perspective, there has been limited work
in the design, prototype and experimental demonstrations of
co-designed multi-functional transceivers [26–28]. In [26], a
hardware prototype of a JRC system was demonstrated where
radar and communications transmit waveforms were realized
with index modulation via generalized spatial modulation.
The transmitting antennas were divided into two sub-arrays,
one for radar and the other for communication. In [27], a
fully digital JRC architecture on hardware was demonstrated
with a common transmitter for radar and communication,
a monostatic radar receiver, and a separate communication
receiver. A hardware prototype was also developed in [28],
where IEEE 802.11ay access points were retroﬁtted for human
detection and sensing in an indoor scenario. To the best of
our knowledge, there is no software or hardware prototype for
end-to-end JRC co-designed transceiver in the prior art.

a

complete

In this work, we propose

end-to-end
architecture followed by a software implementation of a joint
radar-communication framework based on IEEE 802.11ad
for rapid beam alignment
is capable of half duplex
that
communication and three-dimensional radar processing along
range, azimuth and Doppler. The contributions of the paper
can be summarized as follows:

1) Standard IEEE 802.11ad packet consists of optional beam
reﬁnement ﬁelds allocated for beamforming training to
locate the mobile user [20]. The length of these ﬁelds is
directly proportional to the number of beams supported
by the transmitter. Compared to standard beam alignment
for IEEE 802.11ad, we demonstrate that our proposed
architecture accelerates the beam alignment by a factor
of four by omitting the beam training ﬁelds.

2) Standard IEEE 802.11ad framework utilizes a lengthy
beam training procedure between the access point/base
station (BS) 1 and the mobile user (MU) 2. In our work,
we implement three-dimensional (range-Doppler-Angle
the
of Arrival)
cumbersome beam training procedure. Through range
processing, we detect point and extended targets in
the radar ﬁeld-of-view; through Doppler processing, we
identify MU from static clutter; and through digital
beamforming, we directly estimate the angle of arrival
(AoA) of the MU.

signal processing instead of

radar

3) We provide a complete end-to-end prototype of the IEEE
802.11ad based JRC system realized using Matlab. This
includes the design of BS with communication transmitter
and receiver architecture along with the radar signal

1In this work, we use the terms base station and access point

interchangeably

2In this work we use the terms mobile user and radar target interchangeably.

Also, static clutter is differentiated from radar target.

2

processor. We provide an in-depth discussion on the
relevant radar and communication signal models, design
details and signal processing algorithms. We have made
our source codes open for interested readers.

4) The proposed software prototype is experimentally
evaluated for simulated point and extended targets
under free space and Rician channel conditions and
its communication metrics (throughput and latency)
are benchmarked against the standard IEEE 802.11ad
protocol. The radar performance metrics are likewise
benchmarked against frequency modulated continuous
waveforms commonly used in mmW radars.

and

The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we present
a comprehensive overview of the system architecture of the
proposed JRC transceiver followed by its signal modeling in
Section.III. In Section.IV, we present the simulation setup
for evaluating the performance of the proposed prototype. In
Section.V, we present the resultant beam alignment timing
realized by the proposed radar-enhanced IEEE 802.11ad and
contrast it with the standard IEEE 802.1ad beam alignment
the communication link
procedure. Further, we present
metrics and the radar performance metrics for different types
of targets (point and extended) along different trajectories.
We conclude the paper with a summary of the ﬁndings and a
discussion on future works in Section.VI.
Notation: Vectors and matrices are indicated with boldface
respectively, while
lower
variables
characters. Radar
and communication transmitted signals are indicated by
x and y respectively while the received signals that have
undergone one-way and two-way propagation are shown with
ˆy and ˆˆy respectively. Vector superscript T and ∗ denotes
transpose and complex conjugate respectively. We use the
square braces, [·], to indicate discrete-time sequences, and
the curly braces, (·),
to indicate continuous time signals.
The terms BS-TX and BS-RX denote the transmitter and
receiver, respectively, at the BS while MU-TX and MU-RX
denote the transmitter and receiver at the non-access point
station or MU. The uni-directional communication between
BS-TX and MU-RX is referred to as downlink (DL) while
the communication between MU-TX and BS-RX is referred
to as uplink (UL).

indicated with regular

characters

upper

case

are

are

the

links

required

communication
atmospheric

II. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE OF THE JRC TRANSCEIVER
Directional

to
overcome
attenuation associated with
mmW propagation. Hence, BS and MU must each determine
the best beams prior to yDL and yUL communication. The
standard protocol utilizes in-packet training for selecting the
optimum pair of pre-determined beams at the BS and MU
[29]. In our proposed work, the radar functionality within the
BS is used for beam alignment instead to reduce the overall
beam alignment time. In this section, we present an overview
of both the standard and the proposed JRC architectures
and emphasize the modiﬁcations introduced in the former to
realize the latter.

A. Standard 802.11ad Transceiver Architecture

We begin by providing a brief description of the PHY layer
of the IEEE 802.11ad packet structure [20]. The IEEE standard
enables data and header transmission in three different modes:

control, single carrier
(SC), both at 1.76GHz sampling
frequency, and orthogonal frequency division multiplexing
(OFDM) mode at 2.64GHz sampling frequency [20]. We
model the data in our entire analysis in OFDM mode to enable
high communication throughput and low latency. As shown
in Fig.1(a), a packet consists of preamble, header, data, and
beam reﬁnement protocol (BRF). The preamble has Golay
sequences that exhibit perfect auto-correlation properties (with
zero sidelobes) which make them suitable for radar remote
sensing and channel estimation for communication [24]. The
preamble is followed by a header which provides necessary
control information to decode and demodulate the received
data. The header is followed by data after which BRF ﬁelds
with Golay sequences are provided for enabling beam training
between BS and MU. The number of BRF ﬁelds has to be in
multiples of 4 up to a maximum of 64 ﬁelds.

the analog signal

The wireless transceiver architecture for supporting standard
802.11ad communication is presented in Fig.2(a). The
(yDL) are generated in the BS-TX
802.11ad packets
and subsequently passed through the digital
front end
(DFE) consisting of a digital-to-analog converter (DAC).
Subsequently,
is modulated with an RF
carrier
in the analog front end (AFE), ampliﬁed and
transmitted through a transmit phased antenna array. During
the beam alignment phase, which we will henceforth refer
to as Stage 1, the preamble, header and data of the yDL
packet are transmitted through a quasi-omnidirectional beam.
M additional BRF ﬁelds are appended to the yDL packet and
transmitted along M distinct pre-determined beams supported
by the BS-TX phased array. Suitable antenna weight vectors
(AWV) are applied at
the BS-TX phased array to steer
each BRF along the corresponding beam direction. The
received signal at the phased array on the MU-RX, ˆyDL, is
down-converted, digitized and processed to obtain the data.
Based on the number of antennas in the MU-RX, N total
beams may be supported through analog beamforming at the
MU. Based on [29], the BS will repeat the transmission of
the yDL packet N times and each packet will be received
sequentially by different beams at MU as shown in the timing
diagram in Fig.2(b). To summarize, M training ﬁelds in the
ˆyDL packet are received through N beams of the MU-RX
leading to an overall complexity of M × N . The best beam
pair for the BS-TX and MU-RX will be estimated after
the N packets are processed at the MU-RX. If we assume
reciprocity in the propagation environment, then the beam

Fig. 1.
preamble structure and (c) BRF structure.

(a) IEEE 802.11ad JRC transmit packet structure; Expanded (b)

3

alignment procedure between BS-TX and MU-RX for yDL
will provide the necessary information to support the yUL
communication between MU-TX and BS-RX (as the same
antennas support both the TX and RX functionalities at both
BS and MU in half-duplex mode). The total duration for the
beam alignment is the duration of the N DL packets each
appended with M training ﬁelds, the propagation time between
the BS and MU and the receiver communication processing
(RCP) time at the MU. Once the beam alignment is completed
and communicated to the BS, we enter Stage 2, where the data
packets are transmitted between the BS and MU along the
best beam pair without the need for BRF. The beam alignment
process is repeated again depending on the mobility of the MU
and the corresponding signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) estimated at
the BS and MU becomes poor.

The steps for beam alignment in Stage-1 are summarized in

Algorithm1.

B. Proposed JRC Based 802.11ad Transceiver

Now discuss the proposed JRC framework at the BS, as
shown in Fig.3(a), to reduce the latency caused by the beam
alignment procedure. During the beam alignment Stage 1,
the transmitter at the BS-TX generates both radar (xp) and
communication waveforms (yDL). The optional BRF training
ﬁelds used in yDL for the standard are omitted here resulting
in a shorter communication waveform.

In prior art in [23, 30], the radar waveform was embedded
within the communication packet. However, there are several
limitations to this signal model. First, short ranges typical
of automotive environments (∼40 to 200m), result in very
short
two-way propagation times (of the order of several
nanoseconds), which fall within the duration of the yDL
packet (which is of several microseconds). Hence, the signal
model suggested in the prior art would require separate sets
of mmW antennas and hardware to support simultaneous
transmission of yDL through BS-TX while receiving the
ˆˆxp scattered from MU at BS-RX. Second, the system must
manage the interference introduced by the strong transmission
signal received directly at the receiver in order to be able to
detect the weak radar scattered signal. Third, the reciprocity
in the propagation channels for yDL and yUL communications
would no longer hold, requiring separate beam alignment
procedures for yDL and yUL.

just a section of

For all these reasons, we propose that a separate radar
waveform composed of
the 802.11ad
preamble is transmitted by BS-TX antennas through a
quasi-omnidirectional beam. P pulses of the radar waveform,
denoted by xp, p = 1 : P , are transmitted at a pulse
repetition interval of TP RI as shown in the timing diagram
presented in Fig.3(b) and (c). Due to the short duty cycle of
the radar pulse with respect to the TP RI , the same mmW
front-end can be used for both radar transmission at BS-TX
and reception at BS-RX. The radar signals are upconverted
from baseband to analog in the DFE and subsequently to
mmW in the AFE. Since the radar waveform is composed
of the 802.11ad packet preamble features, the same DFE and
AFE and phased antenna array can be used for generating and
transmitting both xp and yDL without increasing the cost and
complexity of the system hardware. The transmitted signal
xp scatters at the MU and is received at the BS-RX where
it is down-converted and digitized at the AFE and DFE. We
introduce a radar-communication decision unit at the BS-RX

HeaderDataBRFOptional Training Field(Omit in JRC)PreambleOFDM SymbolsAGCSubfieldsTRNUnitsCEF TRNSubfieldsReplicated M TimesReplicated M/4 TimesReplicated 4 TimesM = Numberof BRF(c)CEFSTF(b)16 repetitions(a)4

Fig. 2.

(a) Standard 802.11ad system architecture and (b) corresponding timing diagram for Stage-1 beam alignment based on beam training procedure.

Algorithm 1 Beam alignment procedure for standard 802.11ad

Step 1: BS-TX sends n = 1, 2 · · · , N downlink packets, each with M BRF ﬁelds. Each mth BRF ﬁeld is directed along mth

pre-determined BS beam.

Step 2: MU-RX receives N packets along n = 1, 2, · · · , N pre-determined MU beams.
Step 3: The N received packets are processed at MU-RX (RCP) sequentially to determine best beam pair ( ˜m, ˜n).
Step 4: MU-TX communicates about the ˜m beam to BS through yU L without BRF ﬁeld over the ˜nth beam.
Step 5: The BS-RX receives and processes ˆyU L and BS learns about its best beam ,i.e. ˜m for subsequent Stage-2. This completes Stage

-1 for the standard architecture.

for identifying scattered returns of ˆˆxp from the scattered ˆˆyDL
and uplink packet ˆyUL. The scattered ˆˆxp are processed at
the radar signal processing unit (RSP) where the MU are
detected based on their range returns, identiﬁed from static
clutter based on their Doppler and subsequently located in
the angular space. This information from the RSP is used as
feedback to the beamformer to enable the alignment at the
BS-TX and BS-RX during Stage 2. The total time required
for beam alignment at BS is therefore the duration of the P
pulse repetition intervals (P × TP RI ), and the radar signal
processing time. Since these packets are considerably shorter
than yDL, the total duration for beam alignment is expected
to be considerably lower than the standard. Note that in our
proposed architecture, the RSP is introduced only in the BS
and not in the MU. In other words, we have proposed digital
beamforming at the BS-RX but retained analog beamforming
at BS-TX, MU-TX, and MU-RX due to cost and complexity
considerations. Hence, the beam alignment at the MU will
be carried out as per the standard protocol. This architectural
design choice is made since the number of beams at the BS
are typically much greater than at the MU due to the higher
number of antennas at the BS compared to the MU. We
propose two versions for the beam alignment at the MU as
shown in Fig.3(b) and (c). Version-1 of the JRC architecture
as shown in Fig.3(b), is where the MU sends a yUL packet
with N BRF ﬁelds along N pre-determined beams. Then
the best beam is determined at the BS-RX and subsequently
communicated to the MU through the next yDL. Therefore,
the total duration for beam alignment at the MU is based on
the length of one long packet yUL with N BRF, propagation

delay, and processing times at BS and MU.

Version-2 of the JRC architecture as shown in Fig.3(c) on
the other hand, is similar to Fig.2(b) where N ˆyDL packets
are received along N beams at the MU to determine the
best beam at MU. The duration of Stage 1 is based on the
duration to determine the correlation gains of preambles of
N DL packets in Version-2 along with the propagation time
and the communication processing time. Again, since the time
complexity is of the order of N rather than M ×N , we expect
that the beam alignment will be quicker for the MU thereby
supporting lower latency. The steps for beam alignment in
Stage-1 for both versions are summarized in Algorithm2.

Thus the duration of the beam alignment stage for all three
architectures is a function of the signal/packet lengths and the
signal processing times. More details on the comparison of
the timing values are provided in Section.VA with suitable
examples.

III. JRC SIGNAL MODEL
In this section, we provide a detailed discussion of the
JRC signal model and the corresponding software prototype
required to generate the signal at the transmitter and process
the signal at the receiver.

A. JRC Transmitter Signal Model

The different blocks of the waveform generator within
the transmitter are shown in Fig.4(a). We will describe the
generation of each part of the packet.

Preamble and BRF ﬁeld processing: Both the preamble
and BRF ﬁelds are always SC modulated even when header

IEEE 802.11ad OFDM WaveformGenerator (with M  BRF)Communication Transmit PHYDACUCADCDCAnalog Fronr- End (AFE) DigitalFront-End(DFE) AFEDFEMOBILE USERIEEE 802.11ad OFDM Waveform withfeedback  (Without BRF)Communication Transmit PHYBASE STATION Beamformer802.11 ad/ay OFDM  Receiver (On          ) Best Beamfor BS TxWeights802.11ad OFDM  Receiver with TRNProcessing (On         ) Best Beam  for MU Tx BeamformerReceiver Communication  Processing (PHY) WeightsReceiver  Communication Processing (PHY)DFEBS-TXMU-RX(a)RCP  and FeedbackProcessingtime Movile User Tx AntennaOnMobile User Rx AntennaOnMobile User (CommProcessing)RCP and BRF ProcessingBA_MU  Base Station Tx AntennaOnBase Station Rx AntennaOnBase Station (CommProcessing)BA_BS M BRF(i) M BRF M BRF M BRF M BRF M BRFStage 1Stage 2time (ii)Stage 1  Directional (No BRF)Directional (with feedback)N PacketsN PacketsDirectional (with feedback)BA_BS: Total time for beam alignment at BSBA_MU: Total time for beam alignment at MU(b)BS-RXMU-TX5

Fig. 3.
(a) Proposed JRC system architecture with beam alignment of BS through radar signal processing and corresponding (b) timing diagram of JRC
Version-1 where beam alignment of MU is through longer uplink packet with multiple (N ) BRF ﬁelds; (c) Timing for JRC Version-2 where beam alignment
of MU is through reception of multiple (N ) downlink packets through separate MU beams.

and data ﬁelds are modulated with OFDM. The preamble is
divided into the short training ﬁeld (STF) and the channel
estimation ﬁeld (CEF) as shown in Fig.1(b). The STF consists
of sixteen repetitions of 128-bit Golay sequences denoted by
ga128 followed by one repetition of −ga128. The STF bits are
phase-shifted by integer multiples of π/2 as shown in -

yST F [mTc] =





ga128 [m%128]exp(+j π

2 m);

m = 0, 1, · · · , 16 × 128 − 1

−ga128 [m%128]exp(+j π

2 m);

m = 16 × 128 · · · (17 × 128) − 1.

(1)

Here, Tc is bit period and it is reciprocal of the sampling
frequency of 1.76GHz and % indicates a modulus operation.
The CEF consists of a 512-bit Golay complementary pair,
denoted by gu512 and gv512 followed by a 128 bit Golay
sequence denoted by gv128 which are similarly modulated to

yCEF [mTc] = (gu512 [m] + gv512 [m − 512] + gv128 [m − 1024])

exp(+j

π
2

m); m = 0, 1, · · · 1151.

(2)

Together, they are concatenated to form the total preamble
ymod. The sampling frequency for OFDM data bits is 2.64GHz
which is 1.5 times that of SC used for preamble data bits
and hence up-conversion and down-conversion of the Golay
sequences are required. First, the preamble bits are upsampled
by a factor of three as shown below -

Fig. 4. (a) IEEE 802.11ad JRC waveform generation; (b) preamble and BRF
processing; and (c) header and data processing.

(cid:20)

yupsample

m

(cid:21)

Ts
2

=

(cid:26)ymod[m Tc

0;

3 ]; m = 0, 3, 6 · · ·
otherwise.

(3)

IEEE 802.11ad OFDMWaveform Generator (Without  BRF) BeamformerRadar/CommunicationDetection UnitRadar SignalProcessing (On      ...       )802.11 ad/ay OFDM  Receiver (On        ) DACUCADCDCAnalog Fronr- End (AFE) DigitalFront-End (DFE) Radar/Communication Transmit PHYReceiver Radar Processing (PHY)AFEDFEBASE STATION (BS)MOBILE USER (MU)802.11ad OFDM Receiver (On          )RangeAzimuthDopplerReceiver  Communication Processing (PHY)BeamformerReceiver Communication Processing (PHY) IEEE 802.11ad OFDMWaveform Generator (Without BRF) WeightsCommunication Transmit PHYWeightsDFEBS-TXBS-RXMU-RXMU-TXRSPRCP  with BRFProcessingBase Station Tx AntennaOnBase Station Rx AntennaOnBase Station (RSP)Base Station (CommProcessing)time Movile User Tx AntennaOnMobile User Rx AntennaOnMobile User (CommProcessing)BA_BSBest Beamfor MU          BA_MU(i)time Stage 1N BRFDirectional (With Feedback) N BRFWith FeedbackStage 1Stage 2RCP RCP (ii)(a)(b)Movile User Tx AntennaOnMobile User Rx AntennaOnMobile User (CommProcessing)BA_MU BA_BSBase Station Tx AntennaOnBase Station Rx AntennaOnBase Station (RSP)Base Station (CommProcessing)time (i)Stage 1Stage 2(ii)time Stage 1N PacketsDirectionalDirectionalBA_BS: Total time for beam alignment at BS BA_MU: Total time for beam alignment at MU RSPRCP RCPN Packets(c)Data Generation and StimulusHeader AdditionPreamble AdditionDownsampleby 2Resampling andLinear FilteringUpsampleby 3        phase shiftScramblerLDPC R= 3/4 Constellation MappingQ MatrixMultiplicationSubcarrier Addition (Pilot + DC + NULL)IFFT (512 pt) CP Addition (CP Len = 128) QPSK ModulationOFDMWindowing(a)(b)(c)Data Processing6

Algorithm 2 Beam alignment procedure for JRC

Step 1: BS-TX transmits P packets of xp with 50% duty cycle through quasi omnidirectional beams which are reﬂected from the MU

and other targets in the environment.

Step 2: The received P packets of ˆˆxp are identiﬁed at the radar/comm detection unit and processed at BS-RSP to determine the azimuth

of MU (θb). Meanwhile, BS-TX transmits quasi-omnidirectional yDL packets without BRF ﬁelds.

Step 3: Version-1: The ﬁrst ˆyDL is received and processed at MU-RX (RCP). Then the MU-TX transmits yU L with N BRF ﬁelds.

Version-2: The ﬁrst N received ˆyDL packets are processed at MU-RCP and the correlation gains from preamble determines best
beam, ˜n. The duration of Stage-1 is based on the greater of the lengths of the two durations - RSP at BS and RCP at MU.

Step 4: Version-1: The received ˆyU L is identiﬁed at the radar/comm detection unit and processed at BS-RCP when the best beam, ˜nth

is determined.

Step 5: Version-1: The next yDL is transmitted without BRF ﬁelds along θb to MU along with information regarding ˜nth BRF ﬁeld.
Step 6: Version-1: The directional ˆyDL is received and processed at MU-RCP to learn about ˜nth BRF ﬁeld. This completes Stage-1.

Here, Ts is the sampling time corresponding to 2.64GHz.
The up-sampled signal
is subsequently smoothened by a
linear digital ﬁlter where hf ilt[k], k = 1 · · · K are the ﬁlter
coefﬁcients [20] to obtain

(cid:20)

yf ilt

m

(cid:21)

Ts
2

=

K
(cid:88)

k=1

(cid:20)

yupsample

(m − k)

(cid:21)

Ts
2

hf ilt[k],

(4)

m = 0, 1, · · · 4992; k = 1, 2 · · · K.

Then the signal is downsampled by a factor of 2 to obtain

ypreamble[mTs] = yf ilt

2m

(cid:20)

Ts
2

−

K − 1
2

Ts
2

(cid:21)

(5)

m = 0, 1, · · · 4992.

The total length of ypreamble is 4992 and it is of 1.89µs
duration. The steps for generating the preamble bits are
summarized in Fig.4(b). The radar waveform is generated
using the CEF bits as indicated in Fig.1(b). Hence each
pth frame of the radar waveform corresponds to a uniquely
generated xp = ypreamble[4033 : 4800] consisting of M (cid:48) =
768 samples. Since radar bits are already sampled at 2.64GHz,
there is no need for sample rate conversion. Note that the
radar waveform across consecutive TP RI are not identical as
they generated from different seeds used for generating Golay
complementary sequences.

The BRF ﬁelds are optional ﬁelds to be used when beam
alignment is required. Each BRF consists of two sub ﬁelds
- automatic gain control (AGC) and training (TRN) ﬁelds -
as shown in Fig.1(c). The AGC subﬁelds consist of 64 bit
Golay sequences, ga64, repeated M times where M is the total
number of beams supported by analog beamforming for the
phased array in BS-TX. The BRF ﬁelds consist of the CEF
followed by complementary 128 bit Golay sequences, ga128
and −gb128, arranged as shown in Fig.1(c) and replicated M/4
times. The CEF in the BRF is identical to the the CEF in the
preamble. The bits in the BRF are generated at a chip duration
of Tc and subsequently processed in a manner identical to
the preamble as shown in Fig.4(b) to obtain yBRF . Their
total duration can be calculated as 2.845 × [(M/4)]µs. In the
proposed JRC architecture, these ﬁelds are not needed and
skipped during Stage 1. In the standard architecture, these are
used in Stage 1 but skipped in Stage 2.

Header and data processing: The 802.11ad standard
speciﬁes that data and header are modulated over 336
data subcarriers per OFDM symbol and transmitted over a
minimum of 20 OFDM symbols if the optional BRF ﬁelds are
used. In our proposed JRC, the number of OFDM symbols,
Nsym, will be based on the amount of data to be transmitted
as BRF are omitted. An additional OFDM symbol is used (for

both standard and JRC) to specify the control information in
the header such as amount of data transmitted, and information
regarding the modulation and coding schemes (MCS) which
must be subsequently used at the BS-RX and MU-RX to
recover the data in ˆyDL and ˆyUL respectively. Based on the
speciﬁcations, the header must be modulated with quadrature
phase shift keying with 3/4 coding rate (1 parity bit for every
3 data bits). The standard supports the BPSK, QPSK, 16 bit
QAM and 64 bit QAM modulations, and 1/2, 3/4, 5/8, and
13/16 coding rates for the data. In this work, we use the same
MCS for both data and header for simplicity. The header and
data are processed as shown in Fig.4(c). Two data bits are
mapped to each of the 336 data subcarriers corresponding to a
single OFDM symbol. At a 3/4 coding rate, this corresponds
to 3/4 × 672 = 504 bits per OFDM symbol per packet. If
the number of data bits are less than an integral multiple of
504, appropriate zero padding is done. Each block of 504
data bits is sequentially passed through a scrambler which
is a linear feedback shift register. The ﬁrst seven bits of the
header provide a unique scrambler initialization key to enable
bit recovery at the receiver. The scrambled bits are then passed
through a low density parity check (LDPC) encoder with the
3/4 code rate. The standard speciﬁes a parity check matrix,
H, that operates upon the code word c formed of data bits
followed by parity bits of a single OFDM symbol such that
HcT = 0. After LDPC encoding, each frame has 672 bits
which are then modulated into the QPSK WLAN constellation
followed by multiplication with a unit matrix, termed as Q
matrix [20], to randomise the amplitude of the modulated
bits. The outcome of the operations are the 336 modulated
complex samples per OFDM symbol, to which additional DC,
NULL and pilot symbols are added, resulting in 512 complex
symbols. Next, OFDM modulation is performed comprising
of 512-IFFT and 128-length cyclic preﬁx (CP) addition. At
the end, weighted overlap-and-add (WOLA) windowing is
performed on the OFDM modulated header and data to control
the out-of-band emission [31] to obtain ydata. In the end,
a scheduler combines the header and data with preamble,
and BRF samples to form the packet which is then further
processed by DFE and AFE.

Both the radar signal and the communication signals are

converted from digital to analog as shown in

xp(t) =

M (cid:48)
(cid:88)

m=0

xp[mTs]δ (t − mTs) ,

yDL(t) =

M
(cid:88)

m=0

yDL[mTs]δ (t − mTs) .

(6)

(7)

Here M (cid:48) = 768 (512 Golay samples upsampled by a factor
of 1.5) indicates the number of samples within the radar
signal which remains ﬁxed since it is independent of data. The
number of samples within yDL varies based on the amount
of data to be transmitted and the corresponding Nsym OFDM
symbols. These signals are then ampliﬁed such that energy Es
is imparted to each symbol. The ampliﬁer output is convolved
with a root raised cosine transmit shaping ﬁlter, hT , and then
upconverted to the mmW carrier frequency fc as shown in

√

xpup(t) =
√

yDLup(t) =

Es (xp(t) ∗ hT (t)) e+j2πfct
Es (yDL(t) ∗ hT (t)) e+j2πfct.

(8)

(9)

Then the signals are transmitted through analog beamforming
through an NBS element uniform linear array (ULA) after
application of the antenna weight vector, wBST X ∈ CNBS ×1,
as shown in

Xpup (t) = wBST X xp
YDLup (t) = wBST X yDL

T
up(t),
T
up(t).

(10)

(11)

The above process is repeated till all the P radar packets
are transmitted followed by the communication packets after
a guard time interval. In Stage-1, the antenna weight vector
(AWV) is chosen to support a quasi-omnidirectional beam. At
the end of Stage-1, when θ of the MU is determined, then the
AWV is selected to support a directional beam along θ.

B. Radar Signal Detection and Processing

In this section, we ﬁrst discuss the received radar signal
model and then the radar signal processing in detail. The radar
transmits signal Xpup (t) is scattered by the dynamic MU and
received at the NBS element ULA at the BS-RX. If we assume
that the MU is a dynamic target with B point scatterers, each
at range rb(t), then the received signal at the BS-RX antenna
array is

ˆˆXpup (t) =

B
(cid:88)

b=1

abuθb(t)uT

θb(t)

(cid:20)

Xpup (t) ∗ H2

(cid:19)(cid:21)

(cid:18) 2rb(t)
c

+ Z(t).

(12)

c

c

) · · · h2( 2rB (t)

is given by uT
θb

Here ab captures the amplitude of the reﬂection at each point
scatterer and H2 = [h2( 2r1(t)
)] is the two-way
propagation factor which is a function of the time-varying
range of each bth point scatterer. The steering vector from
the antenna array to and from θb
=
[1 ejkdBS sin θb
· · · ] where k is the propagation constant at fc
and dBS is the uniform element spacing. We assume that the
MU is within the maximum unambiguous range of the target
i.e. 2rb(t)
c < TP RI . Z is the additive circular symmetric white
Gaussian noise at the NBS receiver chains. We assume that
each point scatterer is moving with a constant radial velocity
vb, then rb(t) = rob − vb(t)t where rob is the initial distance
from the BS. After down-conversion and digitization and in
the absence of multipath, (12) is

ˆˆXp[m] =

B
(cid:88)

b=1

abuθb[m]uT

θb[m]Xp [m − mb] e−j2πfDb

pTP RI + Z[m],

(13)

) and fDb = 2vbfc

where mb is the sample index corresponding to the time delay
( 2rb(t)
is the Doppler frequency of the bth
c
point scatterer. Note that the received signal in (13) forms a
data cube across fast time (m = 1 : M (cid:48)), slow time (p = 1 : P )

c

7

and the n = 1 : NBS receiver elements. The radar received
signal, ˆˆXp[m] in (13), is distinguished from uplink signal
YU P [m] by the radar-communication detection unit based on
positive correlation with Xp[m] sequence. Note that Golay
sequences in the ˆˆXp will be distinct from the sequence in
YU P . Then, the data cube is processed within the RSP as
shown in Fig.5 to estimate the range (rb), azimuth (θb) and
Doppler velocity (vb) of the MU. In BS-TX, the radar signal
consisting of the Golay sequence was up-sampled from the
original 1.76GHz to 2.64GHz to match the sampling rate of
the OFDM modulated data. Hence, the ﬁrst step in the RSP of
the BS-RX is to down-sample the fast time data from each pth
packet and nth antenna, by a factor of 1.5, to 1.76GHz (from
768 samples to 512 samples) to obtain ˆˆXpds [m]. The fast time
samples from each RF chain of the ﬁrst packet (shown with
the red dotted rectangle in Fig.5) are cross-correlated with the
corresponding Golay sequence as shown in

χ1[r] = ˆˆX1ds [m] ∗ Gu512 [m], m = 1 : 512,
(14)
where Gu512 ∈ R512×NBS consists of the NBS copies
of the column vector gu512. The cross-correlation operation
provides a peak at mb corresponding to the range of the
bth point scatterer provided the SNR is sufﬁcient. The
range axis spans 512 bins with a range resolution of
cTc/2. Then one-dimensional Fourier transform is carried
out after zero-padding across the NBS elements to obtain
the range-azimuth ambiguity plot ˜χ1[m, θ] = DFT{χ1}. The
azimuth axis spans from −90◦ to 90◦ (if the antenna spacing is
half-wavelength) with a bin size governed by the zero-padding
factor. The MU (one or multiple) are identiﬁed based on peaks
in the range-azimuth ambiguity plot. In order to detect multiple
targets across a large dynamic range, the CLEAN algorithm is
implemented [32, 33]. This is an iterative algorithm, wherein
in each ith step the strongest target is identiﬁed based on the
|| ˜χi[r, θ]||. Then the
peak, ai, in the 2D ambiguity plot arg max

ri,θi

1 = ˜χi

2D point spread response, Υ[ri, θi], of the peak target at this
position is removed from the ambiguity plot to generate a
residual plot ˜χi+1
1 − Υ[ri, θi], that is utilized for the
subsequent step. The above two steps are iterated till the
strength of the residue plot falls below a predeﬁned threshold.
The output of the CLEAN algorithm is the list of possible
targets, i = 1 : I, determined in each ith step of the CLEAN
algorithm and their corresponding amplitudes and 2D positions
(ai, ri, θi). Target returns that fall very close to each other
in the range-azimuth ambiguity plot possibly arise from a
single extended target and are clustered together. Note that
some of the targets may not be MU and may be static clutter
in the BS environment. Hence, we next implement Doppler
processing on the returns. While many algorithms may be used
for estimating Doppler velocity [24, 34], we implement the
computationally efﬁcient pulse pair processing which requires
only two consecutive radar packets and is performed only for
those cells in the range-azimuth ambiguity plots corresponding
to the localized targets as shown in

fDi =

−1
2πTP RI

arg [ ˜χ2[ri, θi] ∗ ˜χ1[ri, θi]] .

(15)

Based on estimated Doppler fDb , we determine if the ith target
is static or dynamic. If it is dynamic, then it is regarded as an
MU and its θi is used to determine the antenna weight vector
wBST X in the subsequent Stage-2 as discussed in Section II.

8

Fig. 5. Radar signal processing block: Input radar data cube is ﬁrst processed to obtain range-azimuth ambiguity plots. Multiple targets are detected using
CLEAN. Corresponding Dopplers of each target are estimated through pulse-pair processing.

Fig. 6. Data recovery at communication receiver

C. Communication Received Signal Processing

The aim of the communication receiver is to demodulate and
decode the transmitted data correctly. It performs the same
tasks as the communication transmitter but in reverse order.
The transmitter output propagates from BS-TX to the MU-RX
at range r and azimuth θ through the steering vector uT
θ . If
the MU-RX consists of NM U element ULA, then the received
signal at the MU-RX after analog beamforming with antenna
weight vector, wM U RX ∈ CNM U ×1, is

ˆyDLup (t) = wT

M U RX uφuT
θ

(cid:20)

YDLup (t) ∗ h1

(cid:19)(cid:21)

(cid:18) r(t)
c

+ ζ,

(16)

φ = [1 ejkdM U sin φ · · · ]

where uT
is the steering vector
for the BS at φ with respect to MU-RX for dM U antenna
element spacing, h1( r(t)
c ) is the one-way propagation factor
for each MU and ζ is the additive circular-symmetric white
Gaussian noise. The received RF signal is ampliﬁed, then
down-converted and digitized before it is further processed
through the blocks shown in Fig.6 to extract data from ˆyDL.
The ﬁrst step is to perform OFDM demodulation which
consists of cyclic-preﬁx removal followed by 512-FFT. Then,
least-squares-based channel estimation is performed using
the extracted pilots. Then, minimum mean square error [35]
based channel equalization is carried out on the 336 data
symbols in each OFDM symbol. This is followed by soft
data demodulation [36, 37] and LDPC channel decoding
[38].The output of the LDPC decoder is passed through the
descrambling block, where a dummy header of 57 bits is added
and padded bits are removed and passed through the same
scrambling block as the one used in the transmitter. The output
after descrambling is the decoded data bits extracted from
ˆyDL. Similar processing is also done at BS-RX to recover
the data transmitted over the uplink ˆyU L .

performance metrics.

A. Target Model

We consider a three-dimensional Cartesian space where
xy forms the ground and z is the height axis. The target
motion along two trajectories over a duration of 1s is shown
in Fig.7(a) and (b). For the ﬁrst trajectory, we assume that
the JRC is located at [0m, 0m, 0m] and the target starts from
[−5m, 10m, 0m] and moves along the x-axis in a direction
tangential to the JRC. For the second trajectory, the JRC is
assumed to be at [−13m, 15m, 0m] while the target starts
at [−3m, 15m, 0m] and moves along the x axis in a radial
direction away from the JRC. We consider two types of
dynamic target models/MU - the ﬁrst is a simple isotropic
point target and the second is an extended target with multiple
point scatterers and aspect angle dependence. We consider
two extended targets - a pedestrian and a mid-size car.
For both trajectories, the pedestrian moves with a constant
velocity of 1.5m/s while the car moves with a velocity of
10m/s. The animation data for the walking pedestrian are
obtained from motion capture technology [39, 40]. The data
describes the dynamics of a collection of 27 body parts
of a skeleton at a frame rate of 60Hz. Each body part is
modeled as an ellipsoid, as shown in Fig.7(c), whose radar
cross-section is obtained through analytical expressions. Based
on the methods described in the previous section, we generate
the range-azimuth ambiguity plot of the human and display
the result for one time frame in Fig.7(d). The ﬁgure shows
target and
that
the point scatterers are clustered together within a small
region of the ambiguity plot. Our second extended target is
a mid-size car modelled using a 3D computer-aided design.
The car is animated along the above mentioned trajectories
based on the methodology described in [41, 42]. The metallic
parts of the mid-size car are rendered into 6905 triangular
facets and their 3D centroids are identiﬁed as the collection
of point scatterers as shown in Fig.7(e). The corresponding
range-azimuth ambiguity plot for one timeframe is displayed
in Fig.7(f). The result shows that the car is a larger spatial
target than the pedestrian and thus results in a slightly wider
spread along range and azimuth. The centroid of the car returns
is determined by clustering. In both cases, the Dopplers were
non-zero, indicating that these are dynamic targets and not
static clutter.

the human is essentially a spatially small

IV. SIMULATION SETUP
In this section, we describe the simulation setup for
evaluating the communication link metrics and the radar

B. Channel Model

We consider two types of channel models to model the
two-way radar propagation (h2) and one-way communication

Fast  Time  (m)Slow Time (p) (m,n,p) Matched filteringacross fast timesamples (m) ID FFT acrossantennaelements (n)CLEAN Pulse pairprocessing acrossslow time samples(p)p= 1Antenna Elements (n)p= 2Extraction of Datafield from packetCP Removal (CP Len = 128) FFT (512 pt) Pilot SymbolExtractionChannel Estimation (Least Square)LinearInterpolationChannelEqualisation(MMSE)Data SubcarrierExtractionQPSKDemodulationLDPCDecoderDescramblingOFDM Demodulation9

for different propagation environments such as rural, urban
and suburban [44]. The ﬁrst term in (19) models the direct
path in the one-way propagation factor while ρnlos(t) denotes
the signal arising from the multipath that
is modeled by
an independent and identically distributed complex Gaussian
random variable with zero mean and unit variance. The fading
channel for two-way propagation of the radar signal ˆˆXpup(t) is
modeled by squaring the one-way propagation model in (19)
for each antenna element at the BS-RX.

V. NUMERICAL RESULTS

A. Timing Analysis

In this section, we compare the time taken for beam
alignment - the duration of Stage-1 - for the standard IEEE
802.11ad and the two versions of the proposed JRC. The
timing analysis is carried out based on the architecture
presented in Section.II and the results are reported in Table.I.
For both versions of the JRC and the standard architectures,
we assume that the BS and MU have a ULA of 32 antennas
and 4 antennas respectively. The total beam alignment time
is based on the number of packets, their duration as well
as the processing time of packets which are of the order of
milliseconds. In this work, all the processing is carried out in
ﬂoating-point in MATLAB 2021a on an Intel Core i7 processor
with 128 GB RAM. The one-way and two-way propagation
times for communication and radar are neglected since they
are comparably much shorter (of the order of nanoseconds)
over the short ranges of the MU with respect to the BS than
the signal lengths and signal processing times.

In the standard protocol, yDL consists of 32 BRF ﬁelds
in addition to the preamble, header and data to support beam
alignment at the BS. This results in a packet length of 29.73µs
duration for Nsym = 20 data symbols which is the minimum
speciﬁed by the protocol. This packet is transmitted 4 times
with an inter-packet guard spacing of 1µs to support beam
alignment at the MU. This information is then communicated
through the subsequent yU L transmitted over the MU’s best
beam to the BS where it is processed. Then, the next yDL is
transmitted over the BS’s best beam and received by the MU’s
best beam in Stage-2. The overall beam alignment duration for
BS and MU are 80.1ms and 64ms respectively. The Stage-1
alignment time is computed by the total time required for
both BS and MU beam alignment (the greatest value of the
two times). Note that in the standard beam alignment, the
overall duration is a function of the communication packet
length and hence the number of OFDM data symbols. Also,
the packets are long since they must include the BRF ﬁelds
for all possible beams from the BS and repeated for all
possible beams of the MU. The recovery of data bits from the
received data packet is computationally intensive and hence
requires a long time. After the data bit recovery from each
packet, the BRF ﬁelds are processed for the correlation gains,
generating an M × N matrix. Finally, the ( ˜m, ˜n)th element
of the matrix with the highest correlation gain where ˜m and
˜n provide the best beam among the M BS beams and N
MU beams respectively. All the above factors result in a long
beam alignment phase. Next, we consider the Stage-1 beam
alignment duration of the JRC. The two symbols of radar
waveform (x1 and x2) are each of very short duration (0.29µs)
since they consist of only 512 samples and are transmitted
ahead of a yDL packet with Nsym = 10 symbols of data

Fig. 7. Trajectories followed by a target/MU with respect
to JRC: (a)
tangential motion (b) Radial motion. (c) Point scatterer model of pedestrian
(MU), and (d) 2D range-azimuth ambiguity plot for pedestrian. (e) Point
scatterer model of a mid-size car (MU) and (f) 2D range-azimuth plot for
the car.
propagation (h1) channels. First, we consider an idealistic free
space channel model with a direct line-of-sight (LOS) between
the BS and MU and no multipath/non-line-of-sight (NLOS).
The one-way propagation path between the BS and MU which
are r distance apart is given by
(cid:115)

h1

(cid:19)

(cid:18) r(t)
c

=

GBS(θ)GM U (φ)Lf (r)λ2
(4πr(t))2

(cid:18)

δ

t −

(cid:19)

r(t)
c

,

(17)

where GBS and GM U are the element patterns of the BS
and MU antenna arrays, Lf (r) is the atmospheric attenuation
and δ(·) is the Dirac-delta function. Similarly, the two-way
propagation from the BS to the MU and back, for the radar
signal is shown as

(cid:115)

h2

(cid:19)

(cid:18) 2r(t)
c

=

G2

BS(θ(t))Lf (2r)λ2
(4π)3r4(t)

(cid:18)

δ

t −

(cid:19)

.

2r(t)
c

(18)

Second, we consider the Rician fading model which has
been popularly used to model outdoor mmW communication
[43]. Here, the propagation is characterised by a dominant
LOS component and additional NLOS components. The
communication signal received at MU-RX shown in (16) is
modiﬁed for the fading channel model as

ˆyDLup (t) = wT

M U RX uφuT
θ

YDLup (t) ∗

(cid:34)

(cid:114) J

J +1

h1

(cid:34)

+

ρnlos(t) ∗

(cid:114) 1

J +1

h1

(cid:18) r(t)
c

(cid:19)(cid:35)

(cid:18) r(t)
c
(cid:19)(cid:35)

+ ζ,

(19)

where J is a Rician factor that is empirically determined

yxJRCTargetyxPoint scatterersHeight= 1.76mz (m)y (m)Range = 7m Azimuth = 40oRange = 10m Azimuth = -4oz (m)x(m)y(m)(e)JRCTarget(a)(b)(c)(d)(f)TABLE I
TIMING ANALYSIS FOR BEAM ALIGNMENT FOR STANDARD, JRC Version-1, AND JRC Version-2

10

Signals

Signal Processing

DL Packet yDL (in
µs)
UL Packet yU L (in
µs)
Comm Idle Time
(in µs)
Radar Waveform
xDp (in µs)
Pulse
Interval TP RI
µs)

Repetition
(in

RCP on ˆyDL (in ms)
RCP on ˆyU L (in ms)
Receive
Preamble
Correlation ˆyDL (in ms)
Radar/Comm Detection
Unit (in ms)
Preamble Bits Extraction
(in ms)
RSP on ˆˆxp, p = 1, 2 (in
ms)

Standard

JRC Version- 1
Duration Packets Total Duration Packets Total Duration Packets Total
1
29.73

JRC Version-2

118.9 4.5

4.5

4.5

18

4

4

4.5

1

-

-

16
16
-

-

-

-

1

3

-

-

4
1
-

-

-

-

4.5

9.82

3

-

-

64
16
-

-

-

-

-

0.29

0.29

16
16
-

2.5

1.6

16

1

-

2

2

2
1
-

2

-

-

9.82

-

-

1

0.58

0.29

0.58

0.29

32
16
-

5

-
-

2.5

1.6

1.6

16

16

-

3

2

2

-
-
-

1

-

-

-

3

0.58

0.58

-
-
4.5

2.5

1.6

16

Total time for beam alignment at BS
Total time for beam alignment at MU
Total time for completion of Stage 1

64+16+0.10=80.1
64 ms
80.1 ms

16+2.5+1.6 =20.1
16+16+2.5=34.5
34.5 ms

16+2.5+1.6 =20.1
4.5 ms
20.1 ms

(without BRF ﬁelds). The TP RI for each radar signal is 0.58µs
which results in a maximum detectable range of approximately
87m. The reﬂected received signals, ˆˆxp, p = 1, 2, are detected

in the radar-communication detection unit and subsequently
processed to estimate the MU’s range, Doppler, and azimuth
angle. The azimuth angle of arrival forms the beam direction

Fig. 8. RMSE results for range, azimuth and Doppler velocity estimates from Monte-Carlo based numerical experiments of single and multiple point targets/MU
in free space and Rician propagation conditions with JRC and FMCW radar.

Single TargetMultiple TargetsRician FadingSingle TargetSingle TargetSingle TargetSingle TargetSingle TargetMultiple TargetsMultiple TargetsMultiple TargetsMultiple TargetsMultiple Targets RMSE forRange (m)RMSE forAzimuth(Degree)RMSE forDoppler(m/s)SNR (dB)SNR (dB)SNR (dB)SNR (dB)Friis Free Spacefor the subsequent transmission of packets in Stage-2. Note
that the beam is directed exactly at the most recent position
of the target, unlike the standard where the transmission in
Stage-2 is along the optimum pre-determined beams. Hence
the total time required at the BS for beam alignment is 20ms.
This time requirement is entirely independent of the number
of OFDM data symbols that are transmitted in yDL. Further,
since the BRF ﬁelds are omitted in yDL, the minimum number
of OFDM data symbols that must be transmitted in the packet
is no longer 20 and instead directly based on the amount of
data that is to be transmitted. The JRC is only included in
the BS and not in the MU. Hence, we present two different
versions of beam alignment at the MU.

In JRC Version-1, yDL is ﬁrst received at MU with a
quasi-omnidirectional beam. Once the data are processed,
the MU transmits the yU L with four BRF ﬁelds, such that
each ﬁeld is transmitted through each of the 4 different
pre-determined beams of the MU. The received ˆyU L is
processed at the BS to determine the best ˜nth beam of the
MU. This information is communicated to the MU through
the next yDL. Hence, the total duration for beam alignment
at MU is 34.5ms which is shorter than the standard. In JRC
Version-2, the BS sends four consecutive yDL packets. Each
of these packets consists of 10 OFDM symbols and zero BRF
ﬁelds. The MU receives each packet through the corresponding
4 pre-determined beams, one at a time. All four data packets
are processed to estimate the best ˜nth beam at the MU and
the time taken for beam alignment at MU is 4.5ms. The short
processing time is because the best beam is determined using
the parallel correlation operation on the Golay sequences of the
preamble of the multiple packets. From this timing analysis,
it is evident that the JRC-based architecture provides faster
beam alignment than the standard for the same number of
beams at BS and MU. This can be attributed to two factors -
ﬁrst, the reduction of the packet duration due to the omission
of the BRF ﬁelds due to radar-based beam alignment at the
BS. This also reduces the total number of packets that have
to be transmitted to support the beam alignment at the MU
(especially in Version-1). Second, digital beamforming and
subsequent radar signal processing at the BS-RX support the
detection and localization of the MU. This becomes even more
advantageous when there are multiple MU in the channel
since the above beam reﬁnement protocol for multiple MU can
be carried out in parallel since the radar can detect multiple
targets. This is not possible with the standard protocol.

B. Radar Metrics

the
In this section, we evaluate the performance of
802.11ad-based radar and then benchmark it with the
frequency modulated continuous wave (FMCW) which is
commonly used in mmW radars. The FMCW radar signal
parameters such as carrier frequency (fc), sampling time (Ts),
PRI (TP RI ), and the number of radar pulses are selected to
be identical to that of the JRC waveform. The chirp factor for
the FMCW waveform is 600MHz/µs.

First, we perform Monte-Carlo simulations with 10000
iterations for different radar target scenarios at various SNRs.
We consider single and multiple target cases under free space
and Rician propagation conditions. The value of (J ) is chosen
as 7dB in our work to model the channel according to the
in
rural environment [44]. For the single target scenario,
each iteration of the Monte-Carlo simulation, we consider the

11

point target’s location to be uniformly distributed in the 2D
Cartesian space within 60m × 60m while the velocity of the
target is varied uniformly from -30m/s to 30m/s. The RCS
is varied based on the Swerling-1 model with the mean RCS
selected randomly from 10m2, 1m2, 0.1m2 and 0.01m2. In the
multi-target scenario, the number of targets for each iteration
is varied based on the Poisson distribution with the average
number of targets taken as 2. A target is localized through
radar signal processing to provide range, azimuth, and Doppler
estimates. We calculate the accuracy of these estimates by
calculating the root mean square error (RMSE) of the estimates
of the target with the ground truth as shown in Fig. 8 for
different SNR.

In both free space and Rician conditions, we observe that the
RMSE of the estimates decreases with an increase in the SNR
for both JRC and FMCW waveforms. For the single target
conditions, the lowest RMSE at the highest SNR corresponds
to the resolution sizes of the estimates. In other words, the
RMSE for range estimation is the range resolution which
is a function of the signal bandwidth, while the RMSE for
azimuth estimation is governed by the aperture size at the
BS. Even though the Doppler velocity is estimated through
a very short coherent processing interval of just two radar
packets,
the Doppler velocity estimate shows a low error
because the targets were ﬁrst resolved in range and azimuth
before the Doppler processing was carried out. For all three
parameters - range, azimuth, and Doppler - the error estimates
for the JRC waveform are comparable with that of the FMCW
waveform. Next, we consider the multiple targets scenario for
the free space conditions. Here, we observe that the errors
have increased especially when the SNR is poor. The errors
for both single and multiple targets under Rician conditions
are substantially worse than the free space conditions. This
is especially true for the multiple target scenario under poor
SNR. However, it is important to note that the performance
of the JRC waveform is not any worse than that of the
conventional FMCW under these circumstances.

the experiment for the two extended
Next, we repeat
dynamic targets -
-
the pedestrian and the midsize car
discussed in Section.IV. The two targets follow the trajectories
shown in Fig.7a and b. The ground truth value considered
for the calculation of RMSE is the root node point of the
multiple-point scatterers on the target. The range, Doppler,
and azimuth estimates are reported for free space and Rician
propagation conditions using both the JRC waveform and the
FMCW in Fig.9 and Fig.10. The RMSE for a pedestrian
deteriorates with lower SNR values under both free space
and Rician fading conditions. The pedestrian has a narrower
spatial extent along the range dimension when compared to
the azimuth width. Additionally, the antenna aperture at the
BS is fairly narrow. Due to these reasons, the RMSE error
for azimuth is high when compared to that of the range.
The RMSE for Doppler velocity is sufﬁcient to distinguish
a moving pedestrian from static clutter. All three estimates
deteriorate with the Rician propagation conditions. However,
in all of the cases, the results for the JRC waveform are
comparable to that of the FMCW radar. In the case of the
mid-size car, the RMSE error for range, azimuth, and Doppler
are slightly greater than that of the pedestrian since the target
is spatially larger and hence the ground truth (at the center of
the car) may deviate from the positions of the point scatterers
on the chassis of the car that are identiﬁed by the radar. In this

12

Fig. 11. Time-varying BER for Tangential trajectory-1 in free space conditions
for (a) short duration of 0.2s, (b) long duration of 1s; and Rician space
conditions for (c) short duration of 0.2s, (d) long duration of 1s.

and Rician channel conditions. The communication receiver
is modeled with a system noise temperature of 290K which
gives rise to a mean noise ﬂoor of -71.7dBm for a receiver
bandwidth of 2.64GHz. As the MU moves along the trajectory,
the SNR changes based on the distance between the MU and
the BS. We plot the BER over the entire duration of each
trajectory.

We ﬁrst discuss the results for the tangential line trajectory-1
under free space conditions, which are displayed in Fig.11(a)
and (b). During Stage-1, we observe that
the BER of
standard and both versions of JRC are high and then fall in
Fig.11(a). This corresponds to the poor BER during Stage-1
because of the poor link metrics arising from the low gain
quasi-omnidirectional beams at the BS and MU. This stage
is followed by low BER during Stage-2 with directional
links. The Stage-1 duration for standard, JRC-Version-1 and
JRC-Version-2 are approximately 0.08s, 0.03s and 0.02s
respectively. Hence, the BER is poor for the standard for
a longer duration than the JRC versions. Interestingly, the
BER for Version-1 falls within the same time as Version-2
even though theoretically the former takes longer to complete
the beam alignment. This is because the BS beam is aligned
within this interval for both versions and the high gain from
the BS’s ULA contributes towards lowering the BER even
when the beam alignment is not completed at the MU for
the ﬁrst version. Thus, for free space conditions, we realize
an improvement in the beam alignment by a factor of four
for both the JRC versions when compared to the standard.
Due to the nature of the trajectory, the mobile target crosses
a narrow beam within a short duration of time and frequent
beam alignment is required as shown in Fig.7a. When the
target is outside of the beam, we observe a deterioration of
the BER due to a fall in the SNR in Stage-2. This can be
observed, for example, between 0.12s and 0.2s in Fig.11(b)
for standard, and between 0.15s to 0.17s for the JRC versions.
Since the standard protocol enables the selection of one of
the pre-determined beams while the JRC versions enable
directional beams at the recent most angular position of the
target, the latter results in better SNR and less frequent beam
alignment. The performances of both the standard and the
JRC versions deteriorate in Rician conditions resulting in
higher BER (as observed in Fig.11(c) and (d)) due to strong
interference from multipath. Again, we observe that the beam

Fig. 9. RMSE results for range, azimuth and Doppler velocity estimates
of single pedestrian (extended target) in free space and Rician propagation
conditions with JRC and FMCW radar.

Fig. 10. RMSE results for range, azimuth and Doppler velocity estimates of
a single mid-size car (extended target) in free space and Rician propagation
conditions with JRC and FMCW radar.

case, the error from the JRC is slightly higher than that of the
FMCW waveform (approximately 1 degree in azimuth). Also,
the results from the Rician deteriorate slightly with respect to
the free space conditions.

C. Communication Metrics

In this section, we report the communication metric - the bit
error rate (BER) and throughput - that are calculated on ˆyDL
at MU in Fig. 11 and Fig. 12. The BER is the number of error
bits out of the total transmitted data bits and is computed for
the two different trajectories of the MU and for both free space

RMSE for Range(m)RMSE for Azimuth(Degree)RMSE for Doppler(m/s)Friis Free SpaceFriis Free SpaceFriis Free SpaceRician FadingRician FadingRician FadingSNR (dB)SNR (dB)RMSE for Range(m)RMSE for Azimuth(Degree)RMSE for Doppler(m/s)Friis Free SpaceFriis Free SpaceFriis Free SpaceRician FadingRician FadingRician FadingSNR (dB)SNR (dB)00.050.10.150.210-510-310-1BER (dB)StandardJRC Version 1JRC Version 200.250.50.75110-510-310-100.050.10.150.2Time (Seconds)10-510-310-1BER (dB)00.250.50.751Time (Seconds)10-510-310-1(d)(b)(a)(c)13

Gigabits per second (Gbps) for standard, JRC Version-1 and
JRC Version-2 are presented in Table.II.

The results show that the standard shows a much poorer
throughput under both Frii’s free space and Rician channel
conditions for both trajectories when compared to both
versions of the JRC for the ﬁrst trajectory which required more
frequent beam alignments. Even for the second trajectory,
the standard has poorer throughput due to the longer beam
alignment duration. The throughputs for the two JRC versions
are comparable.

VI. SUMMARY

We provide a complete architectural framework of an IEEE
802.11ad-based JRC wireless transceiver for enabling mmW
communications between BS and fast-moving users. The
radar functionality within the JRC enables the detection of
point and extended mobile user targets and provides accurate
estimates of their angular positions through range, Doppler,
and azimuth processing. This information enables rapid beam
the BS when
alignment of the communication beams at
compared to the lengthy beam training procedure adopted
by the standard protocol. A complete end-to-end software
prototype implementation on MATLAB is provided with
transceiver design details, radar waveform, transmission signal
models, and the corresponding signal processing algorithms.
For an example case of a system with 32 beams in the BS
and 4 beams in the MU, we demonstrate an improvement in
the beam alignment timing by a factor of 4 and a signiﬁcant
improvement in the overall communication throughput for the
JRC with respect to the standard. The main advantages offered
by the JRC are the reduction in the packet lengths and number
due to the omission of the beam training ﬁelds overhead;
and the overall lower BER due to the precise estimate of
the MU’s angular position by the radar within the BS when
compared to the standard’s use of pre-determined beams.
Further improvements in the JRC timing are anticipated for
a higher number of MUs and hardware acceleration of the
radar signal processing. This is the focus of our future work.

REFERENCES

[1] L. Hobert, A. Festag et al., “Enhancements of V2X communication
in support of cooperative autonomous driving,” IEEE Communications
Magazine, vol. 53, no. 12, pp. 64–70, 2015.

[2] J. B. Kenney, “Dedicated short-range communications (DSRC) standards
in the United States,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 99, no. 7, pp.
1162–1182, 2011.

[3] A. Asadi, Q. Wang, and V. Mancuso, “A survey on device-to-device
communication in cellular networks,” IEEE Communications Surveys &
Tutorials, vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 1801–1819, 2014.

[4] P. Wang, B. Di, H. Zhang, K. Bian, and L. Song, “Cellular
V2X communications in unlicensed spectrum: Harmonious coexistence
with VANET in 5G systems,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications, vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 5212–5224, 2018.

[5] J. Choi, V. Va, N. Gonzalez-Prelcic, R. Daniels, C. R. Bhat, and R. W.
Heath, “Millimeter-wave vehicular communication to support massive
automotive sensing,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 54, no. 12,
pp. 160–167, 2016.

[6] C. Liu, M. Li, S. V. Hanly, I. B. Collings, and P. Whiting, “Millimeter
wave beam alignment: Large deviations analysis and design insights,”
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 35, no. 7, pp.
1619–1631, 2017.

[7] J. C. Aviles and A. Kouki, “Position-aided mm-wave beam training

under NLOS conditions,” IEEE Access, vol. 4, pp. 8703–8714, 2016.

[8] B. Li and A. P. Petropulu, “Joint transmit designs for coexistence of
MIMO wireless communications and sparse sensing radars in clutter,”
IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, vol. 53, no. 6,
pp. 2846–2864, 2017.

Fig. 12. Time-varying BER for radial trajectory-2 in free space conditions for
(a) short duration of 0.2s, (b) long duration of 1s; and Rician space conditions
for (c) short duration of 0.2s, (d) Long duration of 1s.

Fig. 13. Comparison of number of packets communicated over 1 second
duration.

alignment is more rapid for the JRC versions than standard
in Fig.11c which lowers the overall BER by a factor varying
from 8 to 32%.

Next, we discuss the results for the radial trajectory-2 in
free space conditions which are displayed in Fig.12(a) and
(b). Again, the beam alignment duration for the two versions
of JRC is much lower than that of the standard in Fig.12a.
The faster beam alignment (again by a factor of four) at the
MU for Version-2 enables slightly superior performance as
evidenced by the results. From Fig.12(b), we observe that this
trajectory requires less frequent beam alignment between the
MU and BS (Fig.7b). Once the best beams are identiﬁed, the
MU remains within the beam for the remaining duration of the
motion. The results for the Rician conditions, shown in Fig.12
(c) and (d), are much poorer than the free space conditions
due to the strong interference from the multipath. Next, we
compare the number of packets transmitted during the time
interval. As shown in Fig. 13, JRC versions allow a higher
number of packet transmissions due to smaller packet sizes
and fewer beam alignments compared to the standard. The
overall communication throughput is calculated based on

(cid:32)

T hroughput =

1 −

(cid:33)

(cid:80)Np

i=1 BERi
Np

.

(D)(Np)
Td

(20)

where, Np is the number of packets transmitted, Td is the
total duration and D is the number of data bits transmitted
in each packet which is kept ﬁxed. The overall throughput in

00.050.10.150.210-510-310-1BER (dB)StandardJRC Version 1JRC Version 200.250.50.75110-510-310-100.050.10.150.2Time (Seconds)10-510-310-1BER (dB)00.250.50.751Time (Seconds)10-510-310-1(d)(b)(a)(c)00.20.40.60.81Time (seconds)00.511.52Number of packets105Standard TangentialJRCStandard RadialTABLE II
THROUGHPUT COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT ARCHITECTURES

Frii’s free space

Rician

Values in Gbps
Trajectory 1 (Translational)
Trajectory 2 (Radial)

Standard
0.336
0.840

JRC Version-1
0.880
0.883

JRC Version-2
0.883
0.883

Standard
0.329
0.839

JRC Version-1
0.878
0.881

JRC Version-2
0.880
0.883

14

[28] J. Pegoraro, J. O. Lacruz, E. Bashirov, M. Rossi, and J. Widmer,
“RAPID: Retroﬁtting IEEE 802.11 ay access points for indoor human
detection and sensing,” ArXiv Preprint arXiv:2109.04819, 2021.
[29] Y. M. Tsang, A. S. Poon, and S. Addepalli, “Coding the beams:
Improving beamforming training in mmwave communication system,” in
2011 IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference-GLOBECOM 2011.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 1–6.

[30] P. Kumari, S. A. Vorobyov, and R. W. Heath, “Adaptive virtual
waveform design for millimeter-wave joint communication–radar,” IEEE
Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 68, pp. 715–730, 2020.
[31] N. Agrawal, S. J. Darak, and F. Bader, “Spectral coexistence of LDACS
and DME: Analysis via hardware software co-design in presence of
real Channels and RF impairments,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology, vol. 69, pp. 9837–9848, Sep. 2020.

[32] S. S. Ram, Y. Li, A. Lin, and H. Ling, “Human tracking using doppler
processing and spatial beamforming,” in 2007 IEEE Radar Conference.
IEEE, 2007, pp. 546–551.

[33] S. S. Ram and H. Ling, “Through-wall tracking of human movers
using joint doppler and array processing,” IEEE Geoscience and Remote
Sensing Letters, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 537–541, 2008.

[34] J. Lee, J. Park, and J. Chun, “Weighted two-dimensional root music for
joint angle-doppler estimation with mimo radar,” IEEE Transactions on
Aerospace and Electronic Systems, vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 1474–1482, 2018.
[35] M. Ibnkahla, Signal processing for mobile communications handbook.

CRC press, 2004.

[36] A. J. Viterbi, “An intuitive justiﬁcation and a simpliﬁed implementation
of the map decoder for convolutional codes,” IEEE Journal on Selected
Areas in Communications, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 260–264, 1998.

[37] V. B. Olivatto, R. R. Lopes, and E. R. de Lima, “Simpliﬁed method
for log-likelihood ratio approximation in high-order modulations based
on the voronoi decomposition,” IEEE Transactions on Broadcasting,
vol. 63, no. 3, pp. 583–589, 2017.

[38] X. Liu, Y. Zhang, and R. Cui, “Variable-node-based dynamic
scheduling strategy for belief-propagation decoding of ldpc codes,” IEEE
communications letters, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 147–150, 2014.

[39] S. S. Ram and H. Ling, “Simulation of human microdopplers using
IEEE,

computer animation data,” in 2008 IEEE Radar Conference.
2008, pp. 1–6.

[40] S. S. Ram, C. Christianson, Y. Kim, and H. Ling, “Simulation and
analysis of human micro-dopplers in through-wall environments,” IEEE
Transactions on Geoscience and remote sensing, vol. 48, no. 4, pp.
2015–2023, 2010.

[41] N. Pandey, G. Duggal, and S. S. Ram, “Database of simulated inverse
synthetic aperture radar images for short range automotive radar,” in
2020 IEEE International Radar Conference (RADAR).
IEEE, 2020,
pp. 238–243.

[42] N. Pandey and S. S. Ram, “Classiﬁcation of automotive targets
using inverse synthetic aperture radar images,” IEEE Transactions on
Intelligent Vehicles, 2022.

[43] D. Yan, K. Guan, D. He, B. Ai, Z. Li, J. Kim, H. Chung, and Z. Zhong,
“Channel characterization for vehicle-to-infrastructure communications
in millimeter-wave band,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 42 325–42 341, 2020.
[44] S. Zhu, T. S. Ghazaany, S. M. Jones, R. A. Abd-Alhameed, J. M.
Noras, T. Van Buren, J. Wilson, T. Suggett, and S. Marker, “Probability
distribution of rician k-factor in urban, suburban and rural areas
using real-world captured data,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and
Propagation, vol. 62, no. 7, pp. 3835–3839, 2014.

[9] A. F. Martone, K.

I. Ranney et al., “Spectrum allocation for
noncooperative radar coexistence,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and
Electronic Systems, vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 90–105, 2017.

[10] A. Hassanien, M. G. Amin, Y. D. Zhang, and F. Ahmad, “Signaling
strategies for dual-function radar communications: An overview,” IEEE
Aerospace and Electronic Systems Magazine, vol. 31, no. 10, pp. 36–45,
2016.

[11] F. Hessar and S. Roy, “Spectrum sharing between a surveillance radar
and secondary Wi-Fi networks,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and
Electronic Systems, vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 1434–1448, 2016.

[12] K. V. Mishra, Y. C. Eldar, E. Shoshan, M. Namer, and M. Meltsin,
“A cognitive sub-nyquist mimo radar prototype,” IEEE Transactions on
Aerospace and Electronic Systems, vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 937–955, 2019.
J. Lim, “Wireless communications
with unmanned aerial vehicles: Opportunities and challenges,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 36–42, 2016.

[13] Y. Zeng, R. Zhang, and T.

[14] A. Hassanien, M. G. Amin, E. Aboutanios,

and B. Himed,
“Dual-function radar communication systems: A solution to the
spectrum congestion problem,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine,
vol. 36, no. 5, pp. 115–126, 2019.

[15] S. S. Ram, S. Singhal, and G. Ghatak, “Optimization of network
radar communication system using stochastic

throughput of
geometry,” Frontiers in Signal Processing, vol. 2, 2022.

joint

[16] C. Sahin, J. Jakabosky, P. M. McCormick et al., “A novel approach
for embedding communication symbols into physical radar waveforms,”
in 2017 IEEE Radar Conference (RadarConf).
IEEE, 2017, pp.
1498–1503.

[17] M. Jamil, H.-J. Zepernick, and M. I. Pettersson, “On integrated radar
and communication systems using oppermann sequences,” in MILCOM
2008-2008 IEEE Military Communications Conference.
IEEE, 2008,
pp. 1–6.

[18] F. Liu, L. Zhou, C. Masouros, A. Li, W. Luo, and A. Petropulu, “Toward
radar-communication systems: Optimal waveform
dual-functional
design,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 66, no. 16, pp.
4264–4279, 2018.

cooperation,

[19] A. R. Chiriyath, B. Paul, and D. W. Bliss, “Radar-communications
IEEE
convergence: Coexistence,
Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Networking, vol. 3,
no. 1, pp. 1–12, 2017.
Std

information
technology—telecommunications
exchange
between systems—local and metropolitan area networks—speciﬁc
requirements—Part 11: Wireless LAN medium access control,” p.
3534, 2016.

for
information

802.11™-2016,

[20] “IEEE

co-design,”

standard

IEEE

and

and

[21] E. Grossi, M. Lops, L. Venturino, and A. Zappone, “Opportunistic radar
in IEEE 802.11 ad networks,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing,
vol. 66, no. 9, pp. 2441–2454, 2018.

[22] P. Kumari, S. A. Vorobyov, and R. W. Heath, “Adaptive virtual
waveform design for millimeter-wave joint communication-radar,” IEEE
Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 68, pp. 715–730, 2019.
[23] G. Duggal, S. Vishwakarma, K. V. Mishra, and S. S. Ram,
“Doppler-resilient 802.11 ad-based ultrashort range automotive joint
radar-communications system,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and
Electronic Systems, vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 4035–4048, 2020.

[24] P. Kumari,

J. Choi, N. Gonzalez-Prelcic,

and R. W. Heath,
“IEEE 802.11ad-based radar: An approach to joint vehicular
on Vehicular
communication-radar
Technology, vol. 67, pp. 3012–3027, Apr. 2018.

IEEE Transactions

system,”

[25] G. Duggal, K. V. Mishra,

“Micro-doppler
and micro-range
802.11ad-based
vehicle-to-pedestrian radar,” in IEEE Radar Conference 2019, 2019,
pp. 1–6.

and S. S. Ram,
doppler-resilient

detection

via

joint
[26] D. Ma, N. Shlezinger
radar-communications
hardware
prototype,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 70, no. 3,
pp. 2283–2298, 2021.

“Spatial modulation for

systems: Design,

analysis,

et al.,

and

[27] P. Kumari, A. Mezghani, and R. W. Heath, “JCR70: A low-complexity
millimeter-wave proof-of-concept platform for a fully-digital SIMO joint
communication-radar,” IEEE Open Journal of Vehicular Technology,
vol. 2, pp. 218–234, 2021.

