Status of the PSF Reconstruction Work Package for
MICADO@ELT

Andrea Graziana, Matteo Simionia, Carmelo Arcidiaconoa, Jani Achrenb, Yann Clenetc, Yixian
Caod, Richard Daviesd, Marco Gullieuszika, Tapio Heline, Daniel Jodlbauerf,g, Hanindyo
Kuncarayaktih,i, Miska Le Louarnj, Seppo Mattilah, Fernando Pedichinik, Roberto Piazzesik,
Elisa Portaluril,a, Aleksi Saloe, Gijs Verdoes Kleijnm, Benedetta Vulcania, Roland Wagnerf,g,
Steven Williamsh,i, Anita Zanellaa, and Werner W. Zeilingern

aINAF Osservatorio Astronomico di Padova, Vicolo dell’Osservatorio 5, I-35122, Padova, Italy
bIncident Angle Oy, Capsiankatu 4 A 29, FI-20320 Turku, Finland
cLESIA, Observatoire de Paris, Section de Meudon 5, place Jules Janssen, F-92195 Meudon
Cedex, France
dMPE - Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur extraterrestrische Physik Giessenbachstrasse 1, D-85748
Garching bei Muenchen, Germany
eLUT University, P.O.Box 20, FI-53851, Lappeenranta, Finland
fIndustrial Mathematics Institute, Johannes Kepler University Linz, Altenberger Strasse 69,
4040 Linz, Austria
gRICAM - Johann Radon Institute for Computational and Applied Mathematics, Altenberger
Strasse 69, 4040 Linz, Austria
hTuorla Observatory, Department of Physics and Astronomy, FI-20014, University of Turku,
Finland
iFinnish Centre for Astronomy with ESO (FINCA), Quantum, Vesilinnantie 5, University of
Turku, FI-20014 Turku, Finland
jEuropean Southern Observatory, Karl Schwarzschild Strasse 2, D-85748 Garching bei
Muenchen, Germany
kINAF - Osservatorio Astronomico di Roma, Via Frascati 33, I-00078, Monte Porzio Catone,
Italy
lINAF - Osservatorio Astronomico d’Abruzzo, Via Mentore Maggini, I-64100 Teramo, Italy
mUniversity of Groningen, PO Box 72, 9700 AB Groningen, the Netherlands
nDepartment of Astrophysics, University of Vienna, Tuerkenschanzstrasse 17, A-1180, Wien,
Austria

ABSTRACT

MICADO is a workhorse instrument for the ESO ELT, allowing ﬁrst light capability for diﬀraction limited
imaging and long-slit spectroscopy at near-infrared wavelengths. The PSF Reconstruction (PSF-R) Team of
MICADO is currently implementing, for the ﬁrst time within all ESO telescopes, a software service devoted to
the blind reconstruction of the PSF. This tool will work independently of the science data, using adaptive optics
telemetry data, both for Single Conjugate (SCAO) and Multi-Conjugate Adaptive Optics (MCAO) allowed by
the MORFEO module. The PSF-R service will support the state-of-the-art post-processing scientiﬁc analysis of
the MICADO imaging and spectroscopic data. We provide here an update of the status of the PSF-R service

Send correspondence to A.G. or M.S.
A.G.: E-mail: andrea.grazian@inaf.it, Telephone: +33 049 829 3465
M.S.: E-mail: matteo.simioni@inaf.it, Telephone: +39 049 829 3547

2
2
0
2

p
e
S
6
1

]

M

I
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

2
v
1
6
1
3
0
.
9
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
tool of MICADO, after successfully fulﬁlling the Final Design Review phase, and discuss recent results obtained
on simulated and real data gathered on instruments similar to MICADO.

Keywords: PSF Reconstruction, MICADO, ELT, Telemetry data, WFS

1. INTRODUCTION

MICADO (Multi-Adaptive Optics Imaging Camera for Deep Observations) is the ﬁrst light instrument of the
European Southern Observatory (ESO) Extremely Large Telescope (ELT) and it will be a workhorse facility
for Adaptive Optics (AO) diﬀraction limited imaging and long-slit spectroscopy at near-infrared wavelengths.1
We provide here an update of the status of the point spread function reconstruction (PSF-R) service tool of
MICADO, after successfully fulﬁlling the Final Design Review (FDR) phase, and discuss recent PSF-R results
obtained on simulated and real data gathered on instruments similar to MICADO.2

A ﬁrst-generation ELT instrument, MICADO will take high resolution images of the Universe at near-infrared
wavelengths. This makes MICADO the ideal instrument for identifying exoplanets, but also for resolving in-
dividual stars in local galaxies (up to Virgo and Fornax), the star forming clumps in high-redshift galaxies,
including the dynamics of dense stellar systems, and investigating the mysterious center of the Milky Way. The
optimal scientiﬁc exploitation of MICADO implies the detailed knowledge of the PSF of each acquired science
image or spectrum. The PSF-R service will support the state-of-the-art post-processing scientiﬁc analysis of the
MICADO imaging and spectroscopic data, but it will not be available for coronographic observations. Indeed,
the knowledge of the reconstructed PSF is essential in order to evaluate the quality of the observed astronomical
data. Additional to quality evaluation, the reconstructed PSF can be used for further improving the reduction
of images and spectra in the post processing phase.

The structure of this paper is the following: in Section 2 we describe the methodology adopted for the PSF
reconstruction of AO-assisted diﬀraction limited instruments, e.g. MICADO. The ﬁrst results obtained by the
MICADO PSF-R Team have been highlighted in Section 3. The size of telemetry data required by the PSF-R
Service every day is discussed in Section 4, while conclusions are drawn in Section 5.

2. METHOD

Diﬀerent methods are available to obtain the PSF of AO-assisted instruments: pure PSF Reconstruction (PSF-
R), Hybrid, Calibrated, Empirical, Adaptive methods. All these methods have been described in detail in.3
MICADO will adopt as baseline the pure PSF Reconstruction method, relying only on telemetry data, without
accessing the focal plane data (i.e. the scientiﬁc frames).

The motivations behind the choice of the Pure (or blind) PSF-R method rely on diﬀerent strategic points. For
35-40% of the extragalactic targets, a MICADO science frame will be void of point sources suitable for standard
PSF characterization (e.g. with empirical or semi-empirical methods). Extragalactic deep ﬁelds are selected for
having as few stars as possible. In general, it is unlikely to have interesting or well studied extragalactic targets
in ﬁelds with many stars per square arcmin. Extragalactic ﬁelds usually have no bright stars suitable to build
reliable empirical PSF model, nor reliable empirical PSF at the position of each galaxy or rare objects (e.g.
high-z/lensed targets).

In case of crowded ﬁelds, it is diﬃcult to recover the shape of the PSF, especially on the wings, due to
contamination from neighboring stars. For these reasons, the Pure PSF-R approach is required when extended
targets cover most of the FoV.

The point spread function reconstruction (PSF-R) Application is a deliverable of the MICADO project. The
PSF-R Team of MICADO is currently implementing, for the ﬁrst time within all ESO telescopes, a software
service devoted to the pure (blind) reconstruction of the PSF. This tool will work independently of the science
data in the focal plane, only using adaptive optics telemetry data of the MICADO camera and spectrograph,
both for Single Conjugate (SCAO) and Multi-Conjugate Adaptive Optics (MCAO) allowed by the MORFEO
module, in post-processing analysis.

The PSF-R application will provide the reconstructed PSFs through an archive querying system, using
the Wave Front Sensor telemetry data that MICADO will generate and save synchronously to each associated

2

science frame. The PSF-R Application of MICADO is designed to work without accessing to the science data
themselves, diﬀerently from other PSF-R techniques that instead use the science data themselves to optimize
the parameters used during the reconstruction phase [4, e.g.]. This allows the pure PSF-R tool to be the most
generally applicable, especially in the extra-galactic cases where empty ﬁelds, devoid of bright stars, are routinely
observed.

The PSF-R Team will build up the software tools and architecture needed to develop and test the PSF-R
Service for MICADO, when the instrument will be mounted on the bench, at the Preliminary Acceptance in
Europe (PAE) and later on at the ELT site in Cerro Armazones for the Final Acceptance.

The pure PSF-R method has been described in detail in,2, 5, 6 and.7

3. RESULTS
The pure PSF-R algorithms of MICADO have been tested using COMPASS8 simulated data with a bright star
(15th magnitude), a Shack-Hartmann Wave Front Sensor (SH WFS) and the ELT M4 geometry. Strehl ratio
(SR), FWHM, and encircled energy (EE) of the simulated star are recovered by the pure PSF-R software at the
1-2% level (Fig. 1). Fig. 1 shows the radial proﬁle of the simulated (blue) and reconstructed (orange) PSF.

Figure 1. The radial proﬁle of the simulated (blue) and reconstructed (orange) PSF. Accuracies of 1-2% have been
reached in Strehl ratio, FWHM, and EE.

Real data from the SOUL9 Adaptive Optic module of the Large Binocular Telescope (LBT) have been used
in order to check that the SCAO Critical Algorithms of the MICADO PSF-R Service can successfully process
also real data from other instruments. The ﬁrst results show that the PSF-R algorithms are able to recover
the Strehl ratio (SR), FWHM and encircled energy proﬁles within a few (∼ 1 − 7%) percent level.2 Based on
this tests, we can conﬁrm that the MICADO PSF-R Application has reached at present a Technology Readiness
Level (TRL) corresponding to TRL=7. Further details on the PSF reconstruction of LBT/SOUL+LUCI data
can be found in this proceeding (Simioni et al. 2022).

The Final design Review (FDR) of the PSF-R software tool for MICADO has been successfully accomplished
in July 2021. This review has been mainly focused on the development plan, the data ﬂow, the telemetry data
rate, the end-to-end workﬂow, and the development of the critical algorithms for PSF-R. No critical item has
been emerged during the FDR, indicating that the maturity level reached by the MICADO PSF-R software is
adequate for that milestone.

The scientiﬁc evaluation of the PSF-R tools is currently on-going for extragalactic cases (e.g. galaxy morphol-
ogy, clumps), as detailed in this proceeding (Simioni et al. 2022). We have also developed tools and a pipeline
to evaluate how uncertainties on the reconstructed PSF translate into uncertainties on scientiﬁc measurements
(and viceversa). In the future, the scientiﬁc evaluation of the PSF-R products will be expanded to other science
cases.

3

4. TELEMETRY DATA RATES

The pure PSF-R software of MICADO relies only on WFS telemetry data, saved at the highest temporal
frequency, in order to better reproduce the sudden variation of the atmospheric conditions.

The telemetry data rate of MICADO WFS is 4.2 Terabyte per night, assuming 9 hours of observation, 100%
of open shutter time, control, and interactive matrices saved at a frequency of 0.2 Hz. The telemetry data rate
is instead 2.1Tb per night, assuming 70% open shutter time plus control and interactive matrices saved at 0.1
Hz. The expected data rate for telemetry is comparable or even less than the scientiﬁc data rate. This amount
of data rate is not a problem considering the planned ESO/ELT infrastructure. Fig. 2 summarizes the expected
data rates in the SCAO case for the PSF-R Service of MICADO. Preliminary calculations for the MCAO mode
of MICADO indicate that the expected data rate for MCAO is slightly lower than in SCAO mode.

Figure 2. The expected data rates for the SCAO option of the PSF-R Service of MICADO.

5. CONCLUSIONS

The present status of the PSF-R software tools of MICADO has been summarised in this paper. In particular,
a number of achievements have been reached by the MICADO PSF-R team:

• Accuracies of 1-7% have been reached both with simulated PSFs and with real LBT SOUL+LUCI data,

as described in.7

• A TRL=7 has been reached by the MICADO PSF-R Service tools.

• There’s no issue for the ESO Raw Science Archive to transfer and store all the WFS telemetry data

produced by MICADO.

• No critical issue has been emerged during the FDR review, indicating that the maturity level of the PSF-R

tools is adequate for that milestone.

4

• No showstopper for PSF-R has been currently identiﬁed, and the PSF-R Service is ready to meet the First

Light of MICADO at ELT in 2027.

The PSF-R software is a data intensive tool, since it requires powerful computers and lot of disk space for
In the future, the development of smart and eﬃcient algorithms is required in order to reduce the

storage.
loading factor on the science users of ELT.

Further details on the PSF-R service for MICADO can be found in this proceeding (Arcidiacono et al. 2022;

Simioni et al. 2022).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work has been partly supported by INAF through the Math, ASTronomy and Research (MAST&R), a
working group for mathematical methods for high-resolution imaging. This proceeding is in memory of our
PSF-R team member Aleksi Salo, who sadly passed away on June 11th 2022. Aleksi was a friend and a talented
young doctoral student with many bright discoveries ahead. He will be greatly missed by his family, friends, and
colleagues. Farewell Aleksi, may the stars shine upon you.

REFERENCES

[1] Davies, R., Ageorges, N., Barl, L., Bedin, L. R., Bender, R., Bernardi, P., Chapron, F., Clenet, Y., Deep,
A., Deul, E., Drost, M., Eisenhauer, F., Falomo, R., Fiorentino, G., F¨orster Schreiber, N. M., Gendron, E.,
Genzel, R., Gratadour, D., Greggio, L., Grupp, F., Held, E., Herbst, T., Hess, H. J., Hubert, Z., Jahnke,
K., Kuijken, K., Lutz, D., Magrin, D., Muschielok, B., Navarro, R., Noyola, E., Paumard, T., Piotto, G.,
Ragazzoni, R., Renzini, A., Rousset, G., Rix, H. W., Saglia, R., Tacconi, L., Thiel, M., Tolstoy, E., Trippe,
S., Tromp, N., Valentijn, E. A., Verdoes Kleijn, G., and Wegner, M., “MICADO: the E-ELT adaptive optics
imaging camera,” in [Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series ], Society
of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series 7735, 77352A (Jul 2010).

[2] Simioni, M., Arcidiacono, C., Grazian, A., Clenet, Y., Davies, R., Gullieuszik, M., Verdoes Kleijn, G.,
Pedichini, F., Wagner, R., Ramlau, R., Zeilinger, W. W., Vidal, F., Vulcani, B., Ragazzoni, R., Sevin, A.,
Salasnich, B., Baruﬀolo, A., Busoni, L., Esposito, S., Gendron, ´E., Piazzesi, R., Portaluri, E., Zanella, A.,
Helin, T., Kuncarayakti, H., Mattila, S., Falomo, R., and Pinna, E., “MICADO PSF-reconstruction work
package description,” in [Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series ],
Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series 11448, 1144837 (Dec. 2020).
[3] Beltramo-Martin, O., Ragland, S., F´etick, R., Correia, C., Dupuy, T., Fiorentino, G., Fusco, T., Jolissaint,
L., Kamann, S., Marasco, A., Massari, D., Neichel, B., Schreiber, L., and Wizinowich, P., “Review of PSF
reconstruction methods and application to post-processing,” in [Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation
Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series ], Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference
Series 11448, 114480A (Dec. 2020).

[4] Neichel, B., Beltramo-Martin, O., Plantet, C., Rossi, F., Agapito, G., Fusco, T., Carolo, E., Carl ˜A, G.,
Cirasuolo, M., and Van Der Burg, R., “TIPTOP: a new tool to eﬃciently predict your favorite AO PSF,”
in [Adaptive Optics Systems VII], Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference
Series 11448, 114482T (Jan. 2021).

[5] Veran, J. P., Rigaut, F., Maitre, H., and Rouan, D., “Estimation of the adaptive optics long-exposure point-
spread function using control loop data.,” Journal of the Optical Society of America A 14, 3057–3069 (Nov.
1997).

[6] Wagner, R., Hofer, C., and Ramlau, R., “Point spread function reconstruction for single-conjugate adaptive
optics on extremely large telescopes,” Journal of Astronomical Telescopes, Instruments, and Systems 4,
049003 (Oct. 2018).

[7] Simioni, M., Arcidiacono, C., Wagner, R., Grazian, A., Gullieuszik, M., Portaluri, E., Vulcani, B., Zanella,
A., Agapito, G., Davies, R., Helin, T., Pedichini, F., Piazzesi, R., Pinna, E., Ramlau, R., Rossi, F., and Salo,
A., “Point spread function reconstruction for SOUL+LUCI LBT data,” JATIS accept. , arXiv:2209.01563
(Sept. 2022).

5

[8] Gratadour, D., Ferreira, F., Sevin, A., Doucet, N., Cl´enet, Y., Gendron, E., Lain´e, M., Vidal, F., Brul´e, J.,
Puech, M., V´erinaud, C., and Carlotti, A., “COMPASS: status update and long term development plan,” in
[Adaptive Optics Systems V ], Marchetti, E., Close, L. M., and V´eran, J.-P., eds., Society of Photo-Optical
Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series 9909, 990971 (July 2016).

[9] Pinna, E., Esposito, S., Hinz, P., Agapito, G., Bonaglia, M., Puglisi, A., Xompero, M., Riccardi, A., Briguglio,
R., Arcidiacono, C., Carbonaro, L., Fini, L., Montoya, M., and Durney, O., “SOUL: the Single conjugated
adaptive Optics Upgrade for LBT,” in [Adaptive Optics Systems V], 9909, 99093V, International Society for
Optics and Photonics (July 2016).

6

