Does Road Diversity Really Matter in
Testing Automated Driving Systems?
A Registered Report

2
2
0
2

p
e
S
3
1

]
E
S
.
s
c
[

1
v
7
4
9
5
0
.
9
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Stefan Klikovits
klikovits@nii.ac.jp
National Institute of Informatics
Tokyo, Japan

Vincenzo Riccio
vincenzo.riccio@usi.ch
Università della Svizzera Italiana (USI)
Lugano, Switzerland

Ezequiel Castellano
ecastellano@nii.ac.jp
National Institute of Informatics
Tokyo, Japan

Ahmet Cetinkaya
ahmet@shibaura-it.ac.jp
Shibaura Institute of Technology
Tokyo, Japan

Alessio Gambi
alessio.gambi@fh-krems.ac.at
IMC University of Applied Science
Krems, Austria

Paolo Arcaini
arcaini@nii.ac.jp
National Institute of Informatics
Tokyo, Japan

Abstract
Background/Context. The use of automated driving systems (ADSs)
in the real world requires rigorous testing to ensure safety. To in-
crease trust, ADSs should be tested on a large set of diverse road
scenarios. Literature suggests that if a vehicle is driven along a set
of geometrically diverse roads—measured using various diversity
measures (DMs)—it will react in a wide range of behaviours, thereby
increasing the chances of observing failures (if any), or strengthen-
ing the confidence in its safety, if no failures are observed. To the
best of our knowledge, however, this assumption has never been
tested before, nor have road DMs been assessed for their properties.
Objective/Aim. Our goal is to perform an exploratory study on 47
currently used and new, potentially promising road DMs. Specifi-
cally, our research questions look into the road DMs themselves, to
analyse their properties (e.g. monotonicity, computation efficiency),
and to test correlation between DMs. Furthermore, we look at the
use of road DMs to investigate whether the assumption that diverse
test suites of roads expose diverse driving behaviour holds.
Method. Our empirical analysis relies on a state-of-the-art, open-
source ADSs testing infrastructure and uses a data set containing
over 97,000 individual road geometries and matching simulation
data that were collected using two driving agents. By sampling
random test suites of various sizes and measuring their roads’ geo-
metric diversity, we study road DMs properties, the correlation
between road DMs, and the correlation between road DMs and the
observed behaviour.

Keywords
road diversity measure, autonomous driving systems, behaviour
diversity, testing

ACM Reference Format:
Stefan Klikovits, Vincenzo Riccio, Ezequiel Castellano, Ahmet Cetinkaya,
Alessio Gambi, and Paolo Arcaini. 2022. Does Road Diversity Really Matter
in Testing Automated Driving Systems?: A Registered Report. In Proceed-
ings of 16th ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Empirical Software En-
gineering and Measurement (ESEM’22). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 9 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

ESEM’22, September 18–23, 2022, Helsinki, Finland
2022. ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

1 Introduction
Automated driving systems (ADSs) are expected to drastically change
the transportation industry by reducing the number of accidents,
avoiding traffic congestion, and lowering fuel consumption. Nonethe-
less, reports of collisions involving ADSs [14, 42] and fatalities [17]
emphasise the need for extensive validation and testing of the tech-
nology before they can be safely released onto public roads.

Thorough testing explores, i.e. covers, different aspects of the sys-
tem under test (SUT)’s behaviour, and thus has the potential to find
bugs and increase the confidence in the SUT’s correctness [22]. Due
to the complexity of the SUT, however, it is generally not possible
to directly find test inputs that maximise behavioural diversity (BD).
Therefore, to increase testing cost-effectiveness, existing research
(e.g. [6, 10, 20]) proposed to generate test suites that maximise test
diversity. The underlying assumption of generating diverse tests
is that the more diverse the tests within a test suite (TS) are, the
higher the SUT’s BD will be, and thus, more of its functionality will
be exercised [50]. Consequently, diversity-driven approaches such
as Novelty search [27] have been applied to generate tests [19, 54].
Likewise, in the ADS domain many testing approaches aim to
generate test suites of driving scenarios that feature various combi-
nations of road structure (e.g. road geometry, lane markings), traffic
participants (e.g. vehicles, pedestrians), and other environmental
factors (e.g. weather, lighting). Arguably, roads are the most funda-
mental aspect of a driving scenario, as other aspects will typically
be expressed in reference to their geometry (e.g. “overtaking on
a straight/curvy road”). Thus, the goal must be to create a TS of
diverse road geometries, to test as many vehicle behaviours as pos-
sible. This TS should ideally cover a range of different straights,
bends, curves, and turns of various degrees of sharpness. The test-
ing of ADSs is typically coverage-based, aiming to maximise the
number of tested road shapes.1 An adequate diversity measure (DM)
should therefore reflect the prioritisation of variety of road geome-
tries. Example 1 illustrates this concept over a set of simple roads.
This interpretation of diversity, which is rooted in Software Testing,
is different than the one from other disciplines. For instance, in
Machine Learning, diversity in training data refers to “equality of
distributions”, which is required to avoid biased datasets. Such a

1Note that this research investigates road diversity. Test suite optimisation such as
minimality or execution efficiency are orthogonal and considered future work.

 
 
 
 
 
 
ESEM’22, September 18–23, 2022, Helsinki, Finland

Klikovits et al.

A

B

C

F

E

D

Figure 1: Different road geometries of varying diversity.

Example 1. The figure above displays a set of six road geometries,
where roads A, B, C and D will very likely provoke very different
driving behaviours, due to the differing curvatures and sharpnesses
of turns. Road E, on the other hand, is a minimally rotated version
of D, which therefore should not change a purely curvature-based
DM when added to the TS. F, on the other hand, is similar but
slightly bent. Even though its average curvature is comparable to
D and E, it will most likely induce different ADS driving behaviour
(“a smooth, long, continuous turn”). An adequately sensitive DM
should therefore reflect the addition of F to the TS.

view is also common in some biological and natural settings [28],
e.g. animal and plant population measurements.

Existing work proposed several DMs to express the diversity of
roads, including measures based on Jaccard similarity index [24],
Iterative Levenshtein distance [37], discrete Fréchet distance [33], and
various other road features (e.g. curvature, complexity, and direction
coverage) [38, 54].

To the best of our knowledge, the choice of DM has only been
reported in published papers, but never justified. Furthermore, the
underlying concept of road diversity measures seems to have never
been studied before in the context of ADS testing. This raises the
paramount questions of “how much road geometries matter in testing
ADSs?” and “how to measure the diversity of a set of roads?” and mo-
tivates our research in finding a set of DMs that can be confidently
used as objective measures of road diversity. Our research aims to
answer the fundamental questions: “Which DMs are well-suited for
use in ADS testing?” and “is there any overlap (correlation) between
the individual measures?”. To answer these questions, we analyse
the DMs’ properties and check if they are indeed good indicators
for vehicle behavioural diversity.
Desired properties of diversity measures. We believe that, in
order to be useful for testing, a DM should guarantee certain prop-
erties which provide guidance towards the achievement of testing
goals akin traditional coverage criteria, such as code coverage,
which guide automatic test generation [21]. We expect adequate
road DMs to have the following properties.
• Monotonicity and growth [47]: A test suite’s diversity should never
decrease when adding roads. Monotonicity is easily achieved by
classical coverage criteria in which the test requirements to cover
are fixed and known in advance. On the contrary, in domains
like ADS, in which test requirements might not be known in
advance, ensuring monotonicity is far from trivial. In addition
to monotonicity, another aspect that is interesting to assess is
how a DM grows as the number of test cases included in a TS
increases. Indeed, a DM that grows for each individual test is able
to discriminate better among roads than a DM that, although
monotonic, increases only for some specific tests. Being able to

discriminate better among roads is desirable, as it can possibly
lead to test the driving agent in different conditions.

• Insensitivity to duplicates [45]: Additionally, the DM should be
insensitive to duplicates (also known as “twin property” [45])
in the test suite, i.e. the DM value should neither increase nor
decrease2 if the same road is added twice. Note that this property
contradicts minimality of the test suite, which is another desired
property in testing; however, this is an orthogonal concern that
should be treated independently and should not be accounted for
by a DM.

• Efficiency: A DM should be also efficient to compute, i.e. comput-
ing a test suite’s DM should take much less time than executing
the test suite. While computing the coverage of classical coverage
criteria is usually fast (as it consists of checking the coverage of
each test requirement individually), computing a road DM could
be expensive, as it may require pairwise comparison of all roads.
• Additivity: Where computational complexity is inevitable, a min-
imal property that should be guaranteed is that the DM computa-
tion should be additive, i.e. any new road added to the test suite
should not require the re-evaluation of the diversity of all the
roads, but only of the currently added road.

Correlation with behavioural diversity. In software testing,
one of the most desired properties of structural coverage crite-
ria is the ability to expose different behaviours of the SUT [22].
This also holds in our context, where higher DM values should
effectively correlate with different observed behaviours. If a DM is
insensitive, it would consider roads that actually trigger different
types of ADS behaviours as similar: if this is the case, by relying on
the coverage of the roads alone, some of those behaviours would
not be triggered. On the other hand, a road DM that is too sensitive
would flag similar roads as different, so wrongly expecting them to
trigger different ADS behaviours. Additionally, such a DM would
lead users to build unnecessary large test suites that do not increase
BD.
Planned study. With the exploratory study proposed in this re-
port, we aim to fill the lack of road DM research and investigate
their effectiveness in ensuring an ADS’s behaviour coverage. We
therefore analyse the properties of a total of 47 DMs (see Section 3.2)
that either have been used for measuring road diversity in previ-
ous research on testing, or have been used to measure diversity
in related domains, such as measuring geometric diversity of lines
and curves [1], or diversity in populations [45]. We perform our
evaluation empirically on an extensive data set of roads, as mathe-
matical analyses are not always possible (or are highly complex).
This empirical study also provides quantitative estimates of effect
sizes (e.g. value growth and efficiency) using real data, which are
difficult to obtain through purely analytical methods.

2 Background and Related Work
The notion of diversity has been considered in various forms for the
testing of ADSs. Here, we first introduce these different methods in
Section 2.1. Then, in Section 2.2, we provide an overview of DMs
that can be used to quantify the diversity of road geometries in a
test suite.

2Absence of decrease is already guaranteed by monotonicity.

Does Road Diversity Really Matter in Testing Automated Driving Systems? – A Registered Report

ESEM’22, September 18–23, 2022, Helsinki, Finland

Table 1: Diversity Measures - Outline

Distance functions

Aggregation Methods

Direct DMs

Discrete Fréchet Distance
Partial Curve Mapping
Dynamic Time Warping
Normalised Relative Angle
Complexity Vectors
Iterative Levenshtein Distance
Jaccard Similarity Index
Area Between Curves
Manhattan Distance

Weitzman Aggregation
Distance Entropy
Summing
Averaging
Averaging of Maxima

Test Set Diameter
Convex Hull of Curves

2.1 Diversity in ADS Testing
Several works on ADS testing aim to generate driving scenarios cost-
effectively. Most of these works aim to achieve driving scenarios’
diversity to avoid generating too similar scenarios that might expose
the same issues multiple times.

Abdessalem et al. [3], Tuncali et al. [41], Zhu et al. [52], Ma-
jumdar et al. [30], and Zhong et al. [51] define diversity in terms
of differences in the scenario configuration space. The scenario
configuration space includes various parameters such as the initial
position and speed of vehicles and pedestrians, the road layout, the
placement of scenery elements and obstacles, as well as weather and
lighting conditions. While Abdessalem et al. and Tuncali et al. did
not measure how much scenarios differ, Zhu et al. used Euclidean
distance to assess how different the scenarios are in the configura-
tion space. Majumdar et al., instead, defined diversity based on the
overall dispersion of the scenario parameters, whereas Zhong et al.
proposed to discriminate diverse tests only if they are at a certain
distance in the configuration space.

Riccio and Tonella [37] designed an Iterative Levenshtein dis-
tance to evaluate test diversity. However, differently from the work
mentioned above, they considered only geometric properties of
roads, i.e. the road shape. Other notable works that considered only
road properties as test diversity discriminant are the ones by Zohdi-
nasab et al. [54], Nguyen et al. [36], Gambi et al. [23][24], and Tang
et al. [40]. In particular, Zohdinasab et al. computed high-level road
features, like smoothness or complexity, and represented the tests
into bi-dimensional feature maps such that roads mapped to the
same map cells are considered similar. Notably, Zohdinasab et al.
also used behavioural features to identify tests that expose similar
behaviour of the ADS. This map representation has been later used
for test selection [36], and test adequacy assessment [23]. Gambi et
al. and Tang et al., instead, discriminated tests based on whether
they take place on roads and intersections made of similar road
segments.

Most of the existing approaches that take road geometry into
account measure test diversity by aggregating similarity metrics
computed over pairs of roads. The next section provides the neces-
sary details on road diversity metrics and aggregation functions.

2.2 Diversity Measures for Road Geometry
In the literature, several methods have been described for comput-
ing DMs for roads. Furthermore, we also draw from other domains
such as geometry and population diversity, to obtain potentially
viable DM methods. We categorise these methods as (1) methods
that can be computed by aggregating pairwise distances between

roads, and (2) methods that can be computed directly by using the
information of each individual road in a test suite.

Table 1 lists the approaches in each category. Diversity computa-
tion methods that belong to the first category are formed as a pair
of a distance function and an aggregation method.

In the following, we overview existing distance functions and
then explain various methods that can be used to aggregate the
distances between road pairs to compute the test suite diversity.

2.2.1 Pairwise Distance Functions To the best of our knowledge,
the following functions are commonly used for measuring dissimi-
larities between roads, (typically represented as curves):
Fréchet and discrete Fréchet distances. Fréchet [2] and discrete
Fréchet [1, 33] distance functions are commonly used to measure
distance between curves. Intuitively, when two vehicles move along
two roads, the maximum point-to-point distance between them
depends on the speed that they move. Fréchet distance corresponds
to the shortest of all possible maximum point-to-point distances that
can be obtained by varying the speeds. Discrete Fréchet distance
provides an efficient way of approximating Fréchet distance for
the case where the curves are described as sequences of straight
segments. These distances have been used for characterising road
dissimilarity [8] and the dissimilarity of the paths vehicles can
take [18, 44].
Partial curve mapping distance. Partial curve mapping distance
between curves representing two roads is defined as the sum of the
discrepancy between the segments of two polygons representing
normalised versions of the curves [48].
Dynamic time warping distance. Dynamic time warping was
originally proposed for computing dissimilarity between temporal
sequences where entries correspond to data obtained at consecutive
time instants [4], but it has also been commonly used for checking
dissimilarity between curves [16, 35].
Relative angle and normalised relative angle distances. Rel-
ative angles and normalised relative angles between curves as de-
fined in [43] provide useful methods for computing pairwise dis-
tance measures that do not change when the curve representing
one of the roads is rotated. This rotation invariance property is es-
pecially useful when testing trajectory planners [31, 46, 53] utilised
in ADSs, as they depend on the sharpness of the turns on a road
but not the entire orientation of the road (e.g. whether the road
goes north or east).
Distance based on complexity vectors. In [38], roads were iden-
tified as sequences of smaller sections called frames. Then, curva-
tures and curvature-derivatives were used to compute the so-called
complexity vectors for each frame. Given a pair of roads with mul-
tiple frames, the distance function of [38] finds the maximum of
the distances between the complexity-wise closest frames of the
roads.
Iterative Levenshtein distance. Curves representing roads can
be described as lists of connected straight segments. The rotational
differences between the orientation of consecutive segments form
sequences of angles. Iterative Levenshtein distance for a pair of
roads is defined in [37] as the Levenshtein edit distance [29] between
the sequences of angles identified for each of the roads.
Jaccard similarity index. Jaccard similarity index (JS) for a pair
of roads is defined in [24] by considering the sets of segments in

ESEM’22, September 18–23, 2022, Helsinki, Finland

Klikovits et al.

those roads. JS takes a value between 0 and 1 corresponding to
the ratio of the number of common segments of the roads to the
total number of segments in the union of segment sets. Thus, the
value 1 − JS can be used as a distance function quantifying the
dissimilarity between a pair of roads.
Area between curves. The area between curves is a geometric
measure that, casually speaking, measures “how much space fits”
between two curves [26]. This measure allows fast computation of
the pairwise distance between road curves.
Manhattan distance over feature vectors. Zohdinasab et al. [54]
used Manhattan distance between feature vectors extracted from
two roads as a measure of dissimilarity between them.

2.2.2 Aggregation Methods After a distance function is used on
each pair of roads in a test suite, an aggregation method can be used
for combining the distances to obtain a single value representing
the DM. The properties of such a DM thus depend not only on the
pairwise distance function but also on the method of aggregation.
We report below aggregation methods commonly used to measure
diversity:
Weitzman aggregation. Weitzman [45] proposed an aggregation
method by considering ideal properties of the relationship between
diversity measures and underlying pairwise distance functions.
The computation of the proposed aggregation method involves
set-based recursions, and is known to be slow in general.
Aggregation through summing. Distances between roads can
be aggregated by taking their sum. This method is also used e.g.
in biology to measure population diversity and corresponds to
functional attribute diversity [11].
Aggregation using distance entropy. Distance entropy was pro-
posed by Shi et al. [39] as a method for quantifying the diversity of a
test suite for applications in software testing. When adapted to our
problem setting, this method first constructs a weighted relationship
graph of roads by using their pairwise distances. The aggregation
is then achieved by computing the entropy of the weights in the
minimum spanning tree of the relationship graph.
Aggregation through averaging all and averaging maximum
distances. Averaging-based aggregation methods were previously
used by [8] and [54]. In particular, [8] considered average of all
pairwise distances between roads as an aggregation method in
diversity computation. Moreover, [54] considered a more general
setting where pairwise distances are defined for general test cases
(not just roads). In the case of roads, the aggregation method of [54]
corresponds to calculating the average of the distances from each
road to the road that it is most distant to (i.e. averaging maximum
distances).

2.2.3 Direct Computation DMs There are two diversity quantifica-
tion methods that do not rely on distances between roads.
Test set diameter. Test set diameter was introduced by Feldt et
al. [20] as a method for direct computation of DMs. It is linked
to normalised compression distance for multisets [7], which uses
Kolmogorov complexity of elements in a set.
Convex hull of curves. Area of the convex hull encompassing
all road curves is a DM that can be computed directly without
comparing roads with each other. Previously, convex hulls of curves
have been used in [9] for checking if roads fit into a given map.

2.2.4 Analysis of the Relationship between Different DMs The re-
lationship between different DMs can be characterised through
correlation of the diversity values that they assign to test suites. In
some special cases, correlation coefficients can be analytically de-
rived. For instance, for the same underlying distance function, DMs
obtained with aggregation through summation and averaging are
perfectly correlated (with correlation coefficient 1), since one is a
scaled version of the other. Analytical correlation analysis becomes
more challenging when DMs use nonlinear aggregation methods or
nonlinear operations in diversity calculations. This point is further
discussed in the context of diversity of species in [13]. There, it is
mentioned that while it is possible to show positive correlation be-
tween DMs, the exact value of the correlation coefficient is hard to
derive analytically in many cases. In such cases, numerical methods
are typically used (see, e.g. [34]).

Another aspect of correlation analysis of DMs is that correlation
of aggregation-based DMs depends also on the relationship between
the underlying distance functions. We note that for some DMs, the
correlation between distance functions is preserved through ag-
gregation. In particular, the correlation coefficient of two DMs
defined by summing all pairwise distances obtained respectively
with two different distance functions is equivalent to the correla-
tion coefficient of the distance functions themselves. However, the
correlation coefficient is hard to obtain analytically, since there is
no straightforward transformation between distance functions for
curves. In [26], some of these distance functions were compared
through an empirical study on an optimisation problem.

3 Research Design
Given the importance of DMs in the testing of ADSs, an objective
comparison of the methods is of vital interest. Specifically, we are
interested in the properties of DMs, as well as whether and how
strongly they are correlated. Additionally, we also would like to
investigate the relationship between (road) DMs and behavioural
diversity (BD) of the vehicle. To this extent, we select 47 DMs (see
Section 3.2) and perform the—to the best of our knowledge—first
exploratory study of DMs for road geometry.

3.1 Research Questions
We specifically investigate the following research questions (RQs):

RQ1 Which DMs guarantee beneficial properties such as mono-
tonicity, insensitivity to duplicates, efficiency, and additivity?
We expect that for a “good” DM, the diversity of a TS cannot
decrease by adding more roads and remains constant when
containing road duplicates. Furthermore, a DM should be
efficient to calculate and extend (i.e. not require complete re-
calculation). In this RQ, we check the DMs individually for
these four properties.

RQ2 Are DMs correlated among each other (i.e. pairwise)? Given
that certain DMs measure similar (e.g. geometric) properties,
we suspect that some of them might be correlated. This infor-
mation is of interest, as the calculation of strongly correlated
DMs might be redundant. In this RQ, we test our assumption
by checking which DMs are correlated, and how strong their
correlation is.

Does Road Diversity Really Matter in Testing Automated Driving Systems? – A Registered Report

ESEM’22, September 18–23, 2022, Helsinki, Finland

RQ3 What is the effect of road length on DMs? Conceptually, long
roads could be seen as compositions of shorter road segments
(e.g. turns and straights). Thus, certain DMs might “average
out” or mask specific distinguishing features of the roads,
such as e.g. when averaging a road with a short sharp turn
after a long straight. On the other hand, geometric DMs might
naturally favour longer roads. For instance, the area between
curves of a slightly left bent and a slightly right bent road
increases with the length of the roads. As this information is
of practical interest to developers, who have to be aware of
such properties, in this RQ, we study whether any DMs are
correlated with the length of the road.

RQ4 Do the DM values correlate with the simulations’ behavioural
diversity? This RQ specifically investigates the main assump-
tion that road diversity can be used as a proxy for BD.
RQ4.a Is there a clear correlation between DMs and the BD
that is calculated from vehicle observations (i.e. acceleration,
brake, velocity, steering input, lateral position)?

RQ4.b Does low (resp. high) road diversity imply low (resp.
high) BD? While RQ4.a investigates general correlation,
here we focus specifically on those TSs with low (resp. high)
DM values and their correlation to BD. By intuition, one
might suspect that while generally high road diversity does
not guarantee high BD, low road diversity certainly implies
low BD. This RQ will specifically evaluate such a correlation.
RQ4.c Do TSs that exert low (resp. high) BD have similar DMs?
This RQ can be thought of as “the inverse” of RQ4.b. We
focus specifically on TSs that yield low (resp. high) BD values
and correlate them with the DMs of the TSs that exert them.
RQ4.d What is the impact of road length on BD? Intuitively,
we might suspect that BD is masked on longer roads (similar
to the effect described in RQ3), and hence, that shorter roads
are preferable. In this RQ we analyse the impact of road
length on correlation strength between DMs and BD.

3.2 Research Subjects
The subject of our research are the 47 diversity measures described
in Section 2. Specifically, we will analyse all combinations of the
nine pairwise distance measures and the five aggregation methods
(see Table 1). Moreover, we will also consider the two direct DMs
test set diameter and convex hull of curves.

We will perform our analyses on all 47 DMs, to get a complete
picture of the DM landscape. Note that some properties for certain
DMs can be deduced e.g. due to the nature of their aggregation
function (monotonicity is for instance not assured when using
averaging). Nonetheless, as we additionally aim to investigate the
effect size, we will calculate these properties for all DMs.

Similarly, even though one might intuitively suspect certain DMs
to be strongly correlated (RQ2), our goal is to test this hypothesis
in a practical setting. The information on which and how strongly
the DMs are correlated is of special interest, since it allows future
users to avoid computing redundant DMs, i.e. those that produce
very similar (if not equivalent) results.

3.3 Road Data Set
In the SBST’2022 Tool Competition [23], competitors provide
search algorithms that generate non-intersecting two-lane roads
which an autonomous driving agent should follow. Each generated
road is simulated and provides timestamped observation records
of the vehicle’s position, velocity, steering angle, brake and throttle
inputs. The roads—cubic interpolations of the Cartesian control
points provided by the search algorithms—are handed to a simulator
and allow calculation of length, curvature, road heading, turn count
and aggregations thereof (e.g. max curvature), etc. Based on this
data, we can extract further information such as relative heading
w.r.t. the road, total driven length, lateral vehicle position, as well as
aggregate values such as minimum, mean, maximum and standard
deviation of steering input, as suggested by [25].

We use a large data set of 97,000 produced in the course of the
competition as the basis for our research on road diversity. To
generalise our data, we use roads generated randomly, as well as
by three road generators, namely AmbieGen, WOGAN and Frenetic
(see [23]), and simulation data provided by executing these roads
using two autonomous driving agents (see Section 3.4).
Data Quality. A preliminary look into the data showed that both
the road data and the simulation information is of high quality.
The created roads have been analysed for self-intersections and
maximum curvature by the SBST pipeline at creation time. Fur-
thermore, we also checked that the simulation data is complete,
i.e. the observation data for vehicle simulation (position, velocity,
acceleration, steering/throttle/brake inputs, etc.) are available for
every record, and the recordings have high enough frequency (e.g.
between 5Hz and 20Hz). Nonetheless, we observed that a limited
number of simulations have potentially invalid data. For instance,
we discovered a small number of “faulty” simulations where the
vehicle started driving in the wrong direction. We will thoroughly
analyse the data and remove such simulations before running our
experiments analysis on the data. To this extent, we will implement
automatic ways to identify and remove these individuals from the
data set, and we will also manually check the test samples. Further-
more, next to the road and simulation data itself, the SBST pipeline
also produced and recorded some statistical information (driving
direction coverage, road curvature measures) for each simulation.
We will adapt our scripts to reproduce this data using our own
(independent) implementation, thereby increasing confidence in
our code and correctness of the existing data.

3.4 Driving Agents
To increase the generalisability of our results, we use driving simu-
lations produced by two independent autonomous driving agents
(DAs), i.e. BeamNG.AI and Dave2. Both considered agents are widely
used in the literature [23, 24, 37, 54] and automatically perform the
lane keeping task. They are, however, conceptually different (rule-
based vs deep learning-based) and, thus, show different driving
behaviour.

BeamNG.AI is the DA shipped with the BeamNG.tech3 driving
simulator. It defines the ego-car’s trajectory before the simulation by
leveraging a perfect knowledge of the road’s geometry. In particular,
BeamNG.AI plans a trajectory that maximises the car’s speed (within

3https://beamng.tech/

ESEM’22, September 18–23, 2022, Helsinki, Finland

Klikovits et al.

pre-defined speed limits), while keeping the vehicle within the right
lane as much as possible.

Dave2 exploits a deep learning architecture consisting of three
convolutional and five fully-connected layers [5]. In particular, it
learns a direct mapping from the on-board sensor camera input
to the steering angle value to be passed to the ego-car’s actuators.
This means that it does not require previous knowledge of the road
geometry.

In our study, we will perform all our analyses that take driving

behaviour into account (i.e. RQ4) w.r.t. each specific agent.

4 Execution Plan
In the following, we describe our specific research plan and provide
the detailed protocol for the experiments for each RQ in Sections
4.1–4.4. Furthermore, shared experimental settings are presented
before.
Test suites. The analysis of both road and behavioural diversity is
based on the calculation of metrics for TSs. A TS is a set of randomly
selected roads of fixed size. Our TSs are sampled with varying sizes
of 10, 20, 50 and 100 roads. To generalise our results, we aim to
perform each computation on 100 TS of each size4.
Behavioural diversity. The metric for BD aims to express how
much of a vehicle’s behavioural range is covered within a TS. In this
work, we say that the behaviour of a vehicle on a road is defined
by the vehicle’s velocity, acceleration, braking, steering input and
lateral position on the road. Each simulation of a driving agent on a
road produces records of these values in regular intervals (roughly
every 0.1 seconds). Through aggregation, we calculate the mean,
minimum, maximum and standard deviation values of each of the
five observations as reported in [25], yielding a total of 20 values.
For the comparison of BD of two road simulations, we calculate
these 20 values for both roads and compute the (20-dimensional)
normalised Euclidean distance. To expand our measurements from
pairwise to set-of-roads metrics, we aggregate using the entropy
approaches used for output diversity, as described in [32].
Driving agent. While the results of RQ1–3 are independent of the
specific DAs, for the analysis of RQ4 we need to take the difference
between DAs into account. Thus, we will separately analyse the
correlation of DMs and BD for each DA.
Rotational adjustment. When thinking of road geometry, we
typically only think of the shape of the road itself, but do not take
its position and orientation into account. Thus, a perfectly straight
road leading north will be seen as equivalent to a straight road of
the same length leading east or west. To avoid being misled, we
should therefore move all roads to the same starting location and
also align them, before calculating the DMs. Nonetheless, some DAs
such as Dave2 (which was trained on image data), take positioning
of the sun and ego’s own shadow into account for their behaviour.
Thus, arguably, roads with the same geometry but different heading
should be distinguished when analysing DMs for Dave2.

We will therefore duplicate our analyses for the TSs of Dave2 and
report any correlation w.r.t. rotated as well as non-rotated roads.
For the rotation, we will therefore do data preprocessing in the
form of a Procrustes analysis [8, 15], leading to two transformations.

4Even though we will use powerful computation infrastructure, certain DMs (e.g. those
using Weitzman aggregation) are computationally (very) expensive for large TSs. We
will therefore set a maximum computation time and adjust our analysis accordingly.

First, the roads are relocated so that their starting points match.
Second, the roads are rotated around the initial point with the
angle of rotation obtained through an optimisation procedure [15].
These steps ensure that two roads with identical shapes yield zero
distance.

4.1 RQ1 – DM Properties
Monotonicity and growth. For some DMs and aggregation meth-
ods such as convex hull of curves, Weitzman aggregation and aggre-
gation through summation, monotonicity can be mathematically
proved. For these DMs and aggregation methods, we can simply
report the theoretical results known from the literature. For other
DMs and aggregation methods such as test set diameter and aggre-
gation using distance entropy, instead, assessing monotonicity is
more challenging as no theoretical results are known from the liter-
ature. For this latter category, we perform an empirical evaluation.
Moreover, in case a measure is monotonic, we are also interested
in assessing “how and how much” it grows; specifically, we are
interested in assessing to what extent each new test increases TS
diversity. Indeed, measures for which each novel (non-duplicated)
test increases the DM value are better at discriminating among
different tests than DMs for which only a few, highly diverse tests
lead to a noticeable change of the DM value; better discrimination
among tests is desirable, as it can lead to exercise different ADS
behaviours (think of adding road F in Example 1). Note that in
the case of DMs via aggregation, diversity largely depends on the
underlying complex distance functions, and, as a result, a precise
mathematical assessment of the growth is hard to achieve. This is
the case even for measures for which we can analytically check
monotonicity (e.g. Weitzman aggregation [45]). Therefore, to quan-
tify the growth, we perform an empirical evaluation. Namely, we
evaluate the relative DM growth when adding new roads to the TS.
Intuitively, smaller TSs should, on average, have a larger growth in
diversity, due to the larger probability of adding a highly diverse
road. Nonetheless, even large test suites’ DM values should reflect
the addition of individuals. We proceed as follows: (1) For each of
the TSs (grouped by size), we compute the DMs. (2) We add 𝑛 new
roads to each TS, where 𝑛 corresponds to 𝑛 ∈ [10%, 20%, 50%, 100%]
of the TS’s size and re-compute the DMs. (3) We then analyse the
difference before and after extension, to report typical statistical
metrics (mean, min, max, standard deviation) for each DM and TS
size.
Insensitivity to duplicates. Similarly to monotonicity, for some
DMs, this property can be determined directly from the DM defini-
tion whereas for other DMs an empirical approach is more suitable.
In particular, mathematical properties of the distance functions can
be used to show that DMs obtained through Weitzman aggregation
and aggregation through summation are insensitive to duplication,
but DMs obtained through averaging-based aggregation methods
do not possess the insensitivity property, as duplication can de-
crease diversity for those DMs. Moreover, in case insensitivity to
duplicates is not guaranteed, it is not possible to mathematically
establish to what extent a DM is sensitive to duplication; therefore,
we plan to assess this effect by means of an empirical study. We
proceed as follows: (1) We calculate the TSs’ DMs. (2) We then
randomly duplicate 𝑛 roads in each TSs, where 𝑛 corresponds to

Does Road Diversity Really Matter in Testing Automated Driving Systems? – A Registered Report

ESEM’22, September 18–23, 2022, Helsinki, Finland

𝑛 ∈ [10%, 20%] of the TS’s size and re-compute the DMs. (3) We then
check if any DM’s value changed and analyse the difference in mag-
nitude before and after the extension, using standard descriptive
statistics (mean, min, max, standard deviation).
Efficiency. Although asymptotic efficiency of a DM can be ob-
tained analytically, it cannot predict concrete results on real data.
Therefore, we conduct an empirical assessment to precisely com-
pare the different DMs and provide an initial evaluation of the DMs’
computational efficiency. We proceed as follows. For each TS, we
record the time it takes to compute each DM. Due to the total of
100 TSs of each size, we then confidently analyse and compare the
DM computation times by size, listing their aggregated information
(mean, median, standard deviation).
Additivity. Additivity measures the time it takes to re-calculate a
TS’s DM after being extended. As for efficiency, only an asymptotic
analysis of additivity is possible starting from the DMs definition;
in order to have a more realistic comparison of the different DMs,
we conduct an empirical study as follows. (1) First we calculate each
TSs’ DMs. (2) We add 𝑛 new roads to each TS, where 𝑛 corresponds
to 𝑛 ∈ [1 road, 2 roads, 10%, 20%] (Note the addition of 1 and 2
roads). (3) We re-calculate the DMs and record the time, before
(4) we analyse the results.

4.2 RQ2 – Pairwise Correlation of DMs
Using the DMs calculated for each TS, we perform correlation anal-
yses on the totality of the data and grouped by TS size. As discussed
in Section 2.2.4, analytical derivation of correlation coefficients
for certain pairs of DMs is prohibitively complex. For this reason,
we perform an empirical evaluation of correlations. We select the
correlation test to use depending on the analysed data. If the data
is normally distributed, we use the Pearson’s correlation test. In-
stead, if the data is not normally distributed, we use the Spearman’s
correlation test. Both tests produce as output a number in [−1, 1],
where 0 means that there is no correlation, while −1 and 1 indi-
cate perfect negative and positive correlation. Intermediate values
indicate different degrees of correlation, and can be interpreted
using existing classifications, such as slight, low, moderate, high,
and very high correlation [12]. When analysing correlation results
between DMs, we report the corresponding classes and use these to
draw conclusions. For instance, if two DMs are not or only weakly
correlated, it could mean that they measure different characteris-
tics of road geometries and that their use in combination might be
more beneficial than using either DM individually. Instead, if two
DMs are strongly correlated, it may hint at redundancy, and the
properties of RQ1 should be used to choose a better-suited one.

4.3 RQ3 – Correlation of DMs and Road Length
Here we analyse the effect of road length on the individual DMs.
(1) We sample random TSs based on the length of the roads. As we
are specifically interested in short (resp. long) roads, we have to
adjust our TS sampling algorithm to assemble random TSs from the
shortest (resp. longest) quantile of the roads. (2) We then calculate
DMs for all TSs and perform an analysis using the same statistical
tests described in Section 4.2, i.e. (3) we calculate DMs for test suites
and (4) perform correlation analysis (as in RQ2) between the DM
values and the (TSs’ average) road length.

The results of this analysis allow determining whether there
is an effect of the road length on the diversity. Combined with
the results of RQ4.d, it helps users in selecting appropriate road
lengths for ADS testing.

4.4 RQ4 – Correlation of DMs and BD
We analyse whether there is a correlation between the individual
DMs and the BD. Unfortunately, due to the complexity of ADSs, it
is typically and generally not possible to define a reliable mathe-
matical model of an ADS’s behaviour from which a correlation can
be analytically deduced. Hence, we empirically study such a corre-
lation and test the sensitivity of ADS behaviour to road diversity.
This RQ aims to discover those DMs that are actually linked to BD,
thus helping testers avoid using DMs that focus on irrelevant road
features.
RQ4.a. First, we analyse the general correlation between road di-
versity (i.e. DMs) and BD. Remember that as BD is different for
the individual DAs, we perform the analyses separately. Specifi-
cally, we proceed as follows: (1) For each TS, we calculate the DMs
and (2) then, for each TS we calculate the BD (as described above).
(3) Finally, we perform correlation analysis between these values.
RQ4.b. We analyse whether there is a specific relation between TSs
with low (resp. high) diversity and the BD they expose. Therefore,
for each DM we (1) first select the TSs that have low (resp. high)
diversity according to the specific DM and (2) analyse the variance
of the TSs’ BD through correlation.
RQ4.c. Intuitively, we perform the “inverse analysis” of RQ4.b.
Specifically, we (1) select test suites that yielded low (resp. high)
BD values in RQ4.a, and (2) evaluate whether the TSs that exposed
them have similarly low (resp. high) DM values.
RQ4.d. We study the effect of road length on the correlation be-
tween DMs and BD, to evaluate if for TSs with short roads, there is
a stronger correlation between DMs and BD. Hence, we proceed as
follows: (1) Using the similar-in-length TSs created in RQ3, we cal-
culate for each TS the values of the DMs and the BD (as in RQ4.a)
(2) We then perform a correlation analysis of each DM and BD
pair. (3) Finally, we compare the yielded correlation coefficients
and check if the correlation of DMs and BD of TSs with short (resp.
long) roads is higher (resp. lower) than the one of “normal” TSs.

5 Discussion

5.1 Contributions and Impact
Our study will help in identifying a catalogue of DMs that are
effective in ensuring behavioural diversity of the considered agents.
Such DMs can be used for multiple tasks in the ADS testing process.
Effective DMs can drive the generation of test suites that exercise
diverse behaviours of the SUT, e.g. as a fitness function of a search-
based test input generation algorithm. Another possible usage of
the proposed DMs is the selection of a reduced number of diverse
tests from an existing test suite, thus reducing the (high) cost of
ADS testing.
Code availability. Evidently, the results of our analysis are spe-
cific to the implementation, the evaluation environment and data set
used. In the spirit of open science, we make our analysis code pub-
licly available, so other users and researchers can (a) reproduce the
results of our study, (b) validate the algorithms and implementation

ESEM’22, September 18–23, 2022, Helsinki, Finland

Klikovits et al.

of our DMs, and (c) extend this study by applying our correlation
analyses to other diversity measures, behavioural metrics and data.

5.2 Threats to Validity
The validity of our study may be affected by different types of
threats [49] that we discuss in the following.
Construct validity. A construct validity threat could be that the
approaches we use to investigate our research questions are not
appropriate. If this is the case, we may draw wrong conclusions
regarding the investigated RQs; for example, we may observe cor-
relation where there is none. To mitigate this threat, we carefully
design the experiments to answer the RQs. To assess monotonicity,
we will explicitly check that the diversity does not decrease when
increasing the number of considered roads. For monotonic mea-
sures, we will check how they grow. We will proceed similarly for
“insensitivity to duplicates”. In order to check correlation, we will
use either the Pearson’s correlation test or the Spearman’s corre-
lation test depending on whether the data is normally distributed
or not. Moreover, we will also consider the strength of the correla-
tion when reporting the results. With regards to measures of BD,
a threat could be that the ones we selected are not representative
of the behavioural diversity in the ADSs that we use, or that they
do not generalise. This could threaten the conclusions we draw in
RQ4. To address this threat, instead of coming up with our own
BD measures, we looked at literature [25] to identify and select BD
measures that have been used and studied before.
Internal validity. An internal validity threat could be that the
observed correlation (if any) between road diversity and behaviour
diversity is due to other confounding factors. For example, the be-
haviour of a driving agent depends not only on the road, but also on
other elements of the driving scenarios such as road participants,
regulatory elements, weather conditions, etc. In complex scenarios
in which all these elements are present, it would very difficult (if
possible at all) to isolate and measure the influence of the road
structure on the driving behaviour. Therefore, there is the risk that
we wrongly observe the correlation because the behaviour diversity
is triggered by the different elements of the driving scenarios and
not the road structure. To mitigate this threat, we use scenarios
composed of only one road, without any other elements. The corre-
lation of behaviour diversity with other traffic elements should be
part of independent studies and we leave it as future work.

Other confounding factors could be the test suite size and the
length of the road. Regarding test suite size, as for some metrics
(i.e. those guaranteeing monotonicity) more tests in general lead to
higher values, there is the risk of observing a positive correlation
that, however, is only due to the test suite size. To mitigate this
threat, we analyse the data by considering different test suite sizes
separately, as described in Section 4. Regarding the length of the
road, instead, we mitigate this threat by assessing the influence of
road length on DMs (RQ3) and BD (RQ4.d).
External validity. A threat of this type is that the results of our
study could be not generalisable to other types of roads, and other
driving agents. To mitigate this threat, we sample from a very
large set of roads created by different road generators, that can
possibly generate roads of different shapes. Moreover, to assess
the influence of road length on the diversity and correlation with
behaviour diversity, we will artificially shorten roads to generate

roads of different lengths. Different agents could react differently to
different types of roads and so lead to different behaviour diversity
values, and so different correlation with road diversity. To mitigate
this threat, we consider two very different types of driving agent:
BeamNG.AI, a rule-based driving agent exploiting the complete
knowledge of the road geometry, and Dave2, a deep learning-based
agent designed at NVIDIA [5].

6 Conclusions
As complete testing of a modern ADSs is impossible, current testing
practices aim to expose a SUT to a suite of diverse scenarios, based
on the assumption that high scenario diversity leads to a wide
behavioural diversity of the SUT. In this report, we propose to
conduct the first exploratory study to test this assumption. Due
to the complexity of ADS scenarios, we focus our study on the
arguably most fundamental part of a scenario description, namely
its road geometry. In the past, a variety of road DMs has been
applied in literature, but to the best of our knowledge, this use has
only been reported, but never truly justified nor studied deeply.

The present report describes the research questions and execu-
tion plan for an exploratory study on 47 road geometry DMs that
are either currently used in ADS testing or might be potentially
beneficial to it. Specifically, our research questions analyse DMs’
properties (RQ1), their pairwise correlation (RQ2), the relationship
between DMs and road length (RQ3) and test the assumption that
road diversity induces behavioural diversity (RQ4).

Our empirical analyses target a large data set of 97,000 individual
road geometries and matching simulation data from two distinct
driving agents. Based on this data, we will identify a catalogue of
DMs that are effective in ensuring behavioural diversity for ADS
agents and help developers effectively test their systems.

Acknowledgments
S. Klikovits, E. Castellano, and P. Arcaini are supported by ERATO
HASUO Metamathematics for Systems Design Project (No. JPM-
JER1603), JST, Funding Reference number: 10.13039/501100009024
ERATO. S. Klikovits is also supported by Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science (JSPS) Grant-in-Aid for Research Activity
Start-up No 20K23334. P. Arcaini is also supported by Engineerable
AI Techniques for Practical Applications of High-Quality Machine
Learning-based Systems Project (Grant Number JPMJMI20B8), JST-
Mirai. A. Cetinkaya is supported by JSPS Grant-in-Aid for Early-
Career Scientists No. 20K14771. A. Gambi was partially supported
by the DFG project STUNT (DFG Grant Agreement n. FR 2955/4-
1) and is also supported by the EU Project FLEXCRASH (Grant
agreement ID: 101069674).

References
[1] Pankaj K Agarwal, Rinat Ben Avraham, Haim Kaplan, and Micha Sharir. 2014.
Computing the discrete Fréchet distance in subquadratic time. SIAM J. Comput.
43, 2 (2014), 429–449.

[2] Boris Aronov, Sariel Har-Peled, Christian Knauer, Yusu Wang, and Carola Wenk.
2006. Fréchet distance for curves, revisited. In European symposium on algorithms.
[3] Raja Ben Abdessalem, Shiva Nejati, Lionel C. Briand, and Thomas Stifter. 2018.
Testing Vision-based Control Systems Using Learnable Evolutionary Algorithms.
In Proc. of the 40th Int. Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE ’18). ACM.
[4] Donald J Berndt and James Clifford. 1994. Using dynamic time warping to find

patterns in time series. In KDD workshop, Vol. 10. Seattle, WA, USA:, 359–370.

Does Road Diversity Really Matter in Testing Automated Driving Systems? – A Registered Report

ESEM’22, September 18–23, 2022, Helsinki, Finland

[5] Mariusz Bojarski, Davide Del Testa, Daniel Dworakowski, Bernhard Firner, Beat
Flepp, Prasoon Goyal, Lawrence D. Jackel, Mathew Monfort, Urs Muller, Jiakai
Zhang, Xin Zhang, Jake Zhao, and Karol Zieba. 2016. End to End Learning for
Self-Driving Cars. CoRR abs/1604.07316 (2016).

[6] Paulo MS Bueno, Mario Jino, and W Eric Wong. 2014. Diversity oriented test
data generation using metaheuristic search techniques. Information Sciences 259
(2014), 490–509.

[7] Alessandro Calò, Paolo Arcaini, Shaukat Ali, Florian Hauer, and Fuyuki Ishikawa.
2020. Generating Avoidable Collision Scenarios for Testing Autonomous Driving
Systems. In IEEE 13th Int. Conf. on Software Testing, Validation and Verification
(ICST). 375–386.

[8] Ezequiel Castellano, Ahmet Cetinkaya, and Paolo Arcaini. 2021. Analysis of Road
Representations in Search-Based Testing of Autonomous Driving Systems. In
2021 IEEE 21st Int. Conf. on Software Quality, Reliability and Security (QRS).
[9] Ezequiel Castellano, Stefan Klikovits, Ahmet Cetinkaya, and Paolo Arcaini. 2022.
FreneticV at the SBST 2022 Tool Competition. In 2022 IEEE/ACM 15th International
Workshop on Search-Based Software Testing (SBST).

[10] Tsong Yueh Chen, Hing Leung, and IK Mak. 2004. Adaptive random testing. In

Annual Asian Computing Science Conference. Springer, 320–329.

[11] Chun-Huo Chiu and Anne Chao. 2014. Distance-based functional diversity
measures and their decomposition: A framework based on Hill numbers. PloS
one 9, 7 (2014), e100014.

[12] Jacob Cohen. 2013. Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences. Routledge.
[13] Paul A. DeBenedictis. 1973. On the correlations between certain diversity indices.

The American Naturalist 107, 954 (1973), 295–302.

[14] DMV California. 2022. Autonomous Vehicle Collision Reports. State of California,

Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV). Last accessed: July 23, 2022.

[15] Ian L. Dryden and Kanti V. Mardia. 2016. Statistical Shape Analysis: With Appli-

cations in R. John Wiley & Sons.

[16] Alon Efrat, Quanfu Fan, and Suresh Venkatasubramanian. 2007. Curve matching,
time warping, and light fields: New algorithms for computing similarity between
curves. Journal of Mathematical Imaging and Vision 27, 3 (2007), 203–216.
[17] @elonbachman. 2020. Tesla Deaths. Regularly updated at tesladeaths.com;

version hosted on Zenodo will be updated periodically..

[18] Chenglin Fan, Jun Luo, and Binhai Zhu. 2010. Fréchet-distance on road networks.
In Int. Conf. on Computational Geometry, Graphs and Applications. Springer.
[19] Robert Feldt and Simon Poulding. 2017. Searching for test data with feature

diversity. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.06017 (2017).

[20] Robert Feldt, Simon Poulding, David Clark, and Shin Yoo. 2016. Test set diameter:
Quantifying the diversity of sets of test cases. In IEEE Int. Conf. on Software
Testing, Verification and Validation. IEEE, 223–233.

[21] Gordon Fraser and Andrea Arcuri. 2011. EvoSuite: Automatic Test Suite Gen-
eration for Object-Oriented Software. In Proc. of the 19th ACM SIGSOFT Sympo-
sium and the 13th European Conference on Foundations of Software Engineering
(ESEC/FSE ’11). ACM, 416–419.

[22] Gordon Fraser and José Miguel Rojas. 2019. Software Testing. Springer Interna-

tional Publishing, 123–192.

[23] Alessio Gambi, Gunel Jahangirova, Vincenzo Riccio, and Fiorella Zampetti. 2022.
SBST Tool Competition 2022. In 15th IEEE/ACM International Workshop on Search-
Based Software Testing, SBST 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, May 9, 2022.

[24] Alessio Gambi, Marc Mueller, and Gordon Fraser. 2019. Automatically Testing
Self-Driving Cars with Search-Based Procedural Content Generation. In Proc. of
the 28th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis
(ISSTA 2019). ACM, 318–328.

[25] Gunel Jahangirova, Andrea Stocco, and Paolo Tonella. 2021. Quality Metrics
and Oracles for Autonomous Vehicles Testing. In 2021 14th IEEE Conference on
Software Testing, Verification and Validation (ICST). 194–204.

[26] Charles F. Jekel, Gerhard Venter, Martin P. Venter, Nielen Stander, and Raphael T.
Haftka. 2019. Similarity measures for identifying material parameters from
hysteresis loops using inverse analysis. International Journal of Material Forming
(may 2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/s12289-018-1421-8

[27] Joel Lehman and Kenneth O Stanley. 2011. Abandoning objectives: Evolution
through the search for novelty alone. Evolutionary computation 19, 2 (2011).
[28] Tom Leinster and Christina A. Cobbold. 2012. Measuring diversity: the impor-
tance of species similarity. Ecology 93, 3 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1890/10-2402.1
[29] Vladimir I. Levenshtein et al. 1966. Binary codes capable of correcting deletions,
insertions, and reversals. In Soviet physics doklady, Vol. 10. Soviet Union, 707–710.
[30] Rupak Majumdar, Aman Mathur, Marcus Pirron, Laura Stegner, and Damien Zuf-
ferey. 2021. Paracosm: A Test Framework for Autonomous Driving Simulations.
In Fundamental Approaches to Software Engineering, Esther Guerra and Mariëlle
Stoelinga (Eds.). Springer International Publishing, 172–195.

[31] Matthew McNaughton, Chris Urmson, John M Dolan, and Jin-Woo Lee. 2011.
Motion planning for autonomous driving with a conformal spatiotemporal lattice.
In 2011 IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation. IEEE, 4889–4895.

[32] Hector D. Menendez, Michele Boreale, Daniele Gorla, and David Clark. 2022.
Output Sampling for Output Diversity in Automatic Unit Test Generation. IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering 48, 1 (2022), 295–308. https://doi.org/10.
1109/TSE.2020.2987377

[33] Axel Mosig and Michael Clausen. 2005. Approximately matching polygonal
curves with respect to the Fréchet distance. Computational Geometry 30, 2
(2005).

[34] Maud A Mouchet, Sébastien Villéger, Norman WH Mason, and David Mouillot.
2010. Functional diversity measures: an overview of their redundancy and their
ability to discriminate community assembly rules. Functional Ecology 24, 4 (2010).
[35] Mario E Munich and Pietro Perona. 1999. Continuous dynamic time warping for
translation-invariant curve alignment with applications to signature verification.
In Proc. 7th Int. Conf. on Computer Vision, Vol. 1. IEEE, 108–115.

[36] Vuong Nguyen, Stefan Huber, and Alessio Gambi. 2021. SALVO: Automated
Generation of Diversified Tests for Self-driving Cars from Existing Maps. In Proc.
of the IEEE Int. Conf. on Artificial Intelligence Testing. 128–135.

[37] Vincenzo Riccio and Paolo Tonella. 2020. Model-Based Exploration of the Frontier
of Behaviours for Deep Learning System Testing. In Proc. of the 28th ACM Joint
Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the
Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE 2020). ACM, 876–888.

[38] Abbas Sadat, Sean Segal, Sergio Casas, James Tu, Bin Yang, Raquel Urtasun, and
Ersin Yumer. 2021. Diverse complexity measures for dataset curation in self-
driving. In Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). IEEE, 8609–8616.
[39] Qingkai Shi, Zhenyu Chen, Chunrong Fang, Yang Feng, and Baowen Xu. 2016.
Measuring the Diversity of a Test Set With Distance Entropy. IEEE Transactions
on Reliability 65, 1 (2016), 19–27.

[40] Yun Tang, Yuan Zhou, Fenghua Wu, Yang Liu, Jun Sun, Wuling Huang, and Gang
Wang. 2021. Route Coverage Testing for Autonomous Vehicles via Map Modeling.
In Proc. of the Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation, ICRA. IEEE, 11450–11456.

[41] Cumhur Erkan Tuncali, Georgios Fainekos, Hisahiro Ito, and James Kapinski. 2018.
Sim-ATAV: Simulation-Based Adversarial Testing Framework for Autonomous
Vehicles. In Proc. of the 21st Int. Conf. on Hybrid Systems: Computation and Control
(Part of CPS Week) (HSCC ’18). ACM, 283–284.

[42] U.S. Department of Transportation, National Highway Traffic Safety Association.
2022. Summary Report: Standing General Order on Crash Reporting for Automated
Driving Systems (DOT HS 813 324). Technical Report.

[43] Michail Vlachos, Dimitrios Gunopulos, and Gautam Das. 2004. Rotation invariant
distance measures for trajectories. In Proc. of the 10th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. on
Knowledge discovery and data mining. 707–712.

[44] Jens Weise and Sanaz Mostaghim. 2021. Many-objective pathfinding based on
fréchet similarity metric. In Int. Conf. on Evolutionary Multi-Criterion Optimiza-
tion. Springer, 375–386.

[45] Martin L Weitzman. 1992. On diversity. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 107,

2 (1992), 363–405.

[46] Moritz Werling, Julius Zieglerand, Sören Kammel, and Sebastian Thrun. 2010.
Optimal trajectory generation for dynamic street scenarios in a Frenet frame. In
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. 987–993.

[47] Elaine J. Weyuker. 1986. Axiomatizing Software Test Data Adequacy. IEEE Trans.

Softw. Eng. 12, 12 (dec 1986), 1128–1138.

[48] Katharina Witowski and Nielen Stander. 2012. Parameter identification of hys-
teretic models using partial curve mapping. In 12th AIAA Aviation Technology,
Integration, and Operations (ATIO) Conference and 14th AIAA/ISSMO Multidisci-
plinary Analysis and Optimization Conference. 5580.

[49] Claes Wohlin, Per Runeson, Martin Hst, Magnus C. Ohlsson, Bjrn Regnell, and An-
ders Wessln. 2012. Experimentation in Software Engineering. Springer Publishing
Company, Incorporated.

[50] Qing Xie and Atif M Memon. 2006. Studying the Characteristics of a "Good" GUI

Test Suite. In 17th Int. Symp. on Software Reliability Engineering.

[51] Ziyuan Zhong, Gail E. Kaiser, and Baishakhi Ray. 2021. Neural Network Guided
Evolutionary Fuzzing for Finding Traffic Violations of Autonomous Vehicles.
CoRR abs/2109.06126 (2021). arXiv:2109.06126

[52] Bing Zhu, Peixing Zhang, Jian Zhao, and Weiwen Deng. 2021. Hazardous Scenario
Enhanced Generation for Automated Vehicle Testing Based on Optimization
Searching Method. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems (2021).
[53] Sheng Zhu and Bilin Aksun-Guvenc. 2020. Trajectory Planning of Autonomous
Vehicles Based on Parameterized Control Optimization in Dynamic on-Road
Environments. J. Intel. Robot. Syst. 100, 3 (2020), 1055–1067.

[54] Tahereh Zohdinasab, Vincenzo Riccio, Alessio Gambi, and Paolo Tonella. 2021.
DeepHyperion: Exploring the Feature Space of Deep Learning-Based Systems
through Illumination Search. In Proc. of the 30th ACM SIGSOFT International
Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (ISSTA 2021). ACM, 79–90.

