Dynamic Optical Path Provisioning for Alien Access 
Links: Architecture, Demonstration, and Challenges 

Hideki Nishizawa, Takeo Sasai, Takeru Inoue, Kazuya Anazawa, Toru Mano, Kei Kitamura, Yoshiaki Sone, Tetsuro Inui, 
and Koichi Takasugi 

NTT Network Innovation Laboratories 

Abstract— With the spread of Data Center Interconnect (DCI) 
and local 5G, there is a growing need for dynamically established 
connections  between  customer  locations  through  high-capacity 
optical  links.  However,  link  parameters  such  as  signal  power 
profile  and  amplifier  gains  are  often  unknown  and  have  to  be 
measured by experts, preventing dynamic path provisioning due 
to  the  time-consuming  manual  measurements.  Although  several 
techniques for estimating the unknown parameters of such  alien 
access  links  have  been  proposed,  no  work  has  presented 
architecture and protocol that drive the estimation techniques to 
establish  an  optical  path  between  the  customer  locations.  Our 
study aims to automatically connect customer-owned transceivers 
via alien access links with optimal quality of transmission (QoT). 
We  first  propose  an  architecture  and  protocol  for  cooperative 
optical  path  design  between  a  customer  and  carrier,  utilizing  a 
state-of-the-art technique for estimating link parameters. We then 
implement  the  proposed  protocol  in  a  software-defined  network 
(SDN) controller and white-box transponders using an open API. 
The experiments demonstrate that the optical path is dynamically 
established  via  alien  access  links  in  137  seconds  from  the 
transceiver's  cold  start.  Lastly,  we  discuss  the  QoT  accuracy 
obtained with this method and the remaining issues.  

I. INTRODUCTION 

DIGITAL  coherent  optical  transmission  technology  was 
developed  as  a  long-haul  optical  transmission  technology.  In 
the  2010s,  with  the  advancement  of  silicon  microfabrication 
technology,  it  has  rapidly  become  more  power  efficient  and 
modularized (with prices dropping over 25%/year) and is now 
implemented  in  various  use  cases  other  than  long-haul.  In 
particular, the Data Center Interconnect (DCI) market is rapidly 
expanding  at  a  CAGR  of  more  than  10%.  In  the  local  5G 
market, where the CAGR is approaching 50%, there will be a 
rapidly growing demand for optical networks to connect local 
5G  sites  that  are  located  far  from  each  other.  To  meet  the 
emerging demands for DCI and local 5G, optical paths should 
occasionally  be  rebuilt.  Aside  from  DCI  and  local  5G,  in  an 
emergency  such  as  a  disaster,  the  network  must  be  re-
established by finding an appropriate transceiver configuration 
for the damaged fiber in a short period of time and conducting 
provisioning/restoration.  In  public  networks,  if  low  margin 
operation  [1]  becomes  regular  practice  for  effective  use  of 
optical  resources,  it  is  necessary  to  periodically  update  the 
transceiver  configuration  and  routes  before  the  quality  of 
transmission (QoT) degrades. In addition, for low latency and 
power savings, it is desirable to directly connect customers with 
optical  paths  without  optical-electrical-optical  conversion 

whenever possible.  

There  are several challenges to dynamically  setting  up an 
optical path in practice. Optical paths often need to be set up for 
transmission  links  whose  components  are  unknown  or  whose 
parameters  must  be  re-measured.  Coherent  transceivers  take 
only a few minutes to stabilize optical signals from a cold start, 
but it takes at least a few days for a carrier to set up an optical 
path in current operations. This is because experts take the time 
to investigate the link parameters such as fiber types, the optical 
signal power profile along the link, and amplifier gains when 
setting  up  an  optical  transmission  link.  Our  goal  is  to 
automatically  configure  an  optical  path  with  optimal 
transmission  quality  over  a  transmission  link  whose  current 
parameters  are  unknown.  In  this  paper,  we  define  an  alien 
access  link  (AAL)  as  an  access  network  whose  components, 
quality, and parameters are unknown, and consider a situation 
in  which  customer  transceivers  are  connected  to  a  carrier-
managed network with the AALs (Figure 1). 

Fig. 1. Alien access links directly connecting consumers. 

There  have  been  several  studies  related  to  dynamic  path 
provisioning  via  AALs.  Advancements  in  digital  signal 
processing  and  machine  learning  technologies  have  made  it 
possible for receivers to estimate the QoT. The following two 
approaches have been proposed. 
•  Digital  longitudinal  monitoring  (DLM):  Estimates  link 
parameters in a distance-wise and component-wise manner 
such  as  signal  power  profile,  fiber  types,  gain  spectra  of 
each amplifier, etc. [2, 3] The estimated parameters are then 
used by an optical path design tool [4] to estimate the QoT. 
•  Black box approach: A characterized probing light  with a 
fixed modulation format and symbol rate is inserted into the 
network,  and  the  forward  error  correction  (FEC)  BER 
estimation of the receiver is used to estimate the end-to-end 

 Copyright © 2022 IEEE, Personal use is permitted. For any other purposes, permission must be obtained from the IEEE by emailing pubs-permissions@ieee.org. 

 
 
 
 
 
(EtE) QoT. [5, 6, 7]  

After  QoT  is  estimated  using  these  approaches,  the  optimal 
configuration can be set to the transceiver using an Open API 
such as the Transponder Abstraction Interface (TAI) defined in 
the Telecom Infra Project (TIP). If necessary, the line system 
can also be controlled by the OpenROADM YANG model or a 
similar model. Optical signals coming from AALs are likely to 
be alien wavelengths, which have been extensively researched 
[8]. Research is also being conducted to establish optical paths 
beyond administrative boundaries, such as between customers 
and  carriers  (GMPLS  [9],  alien  wavelength  [10]).  Thus, 
although these  elemental technologies exist,  architectures and 
protocols needed for the use cases described at the beginning of 
this paper have not been studied.  

The contributions of this paper are as follows: 

•  We compare the two QoT estimation approaches assuming 
that  the  transmission  link  between  the  carrier  and  the 
customer is unknown. After clarifying the advantages and 
disadvantages of the two approaches, the remainder of this 
paper focuses on the DLM approach because of its distance-
based resolution which is indispensable to fault diagnosis. 
•  We propose an architecture and protocol based on the DLM 
approach.  A  key  architectural  issue  is  whether  to  place 
required functions, e.g., a DLM estimator, on a customer or 
carrier.  The  protocol  is  designed  to  exchange  only 
disclosable information between a customer and carrier. 
•  Using the TIP’s TAI, we implement the proposed protocol 
in  an  SDN  controller  and  a  white-box  transponder.  We 
demonstrate that the optical path can be configured from a 
cold start without a significant temporal overhead. We also 
discuss  the  accuracy  of  the  resulting  QoT  based  on  the 
required margins. 

Lastly,  remaining  research  issues  are  discussed  in  detail, 

including those specific to practical operation.  

II. NETWORK MODEL AND REQUIREMENTS 

Our study is based on the following simple network model 
(configuration and assumptions). We assume the configuration 
shown  in  Figure  1,  in  which  the  path  traverses  the  customer 
transceiver,  AAL,  carrier-managed  network,  AAL,  and 
customer  transceiver.  The  customer  transceivers  and  the 
carrier's line system may be produced by different vendors. The 
following assumptions are made for each in this paper. 
• 

AALs: For simplicity, only a single wavelength channel is 
used in this paper (however, most of the arguments in this 
paper are valid even if WDM is assumed). We assume that 
neither  the  customer  nor  the  carrier  knows  the  link 
parameters. 
Carrier-managed network: Any optical device (amplifier, 
filter,  etc.)  may  be  installed.  The  carrier  knows  the  link 
parameters, while the customers do not. 
Customer transceivers: We assume coherent transceivers. 
Only the customers know the transceiver characteristics, 
i.e.,  the  optical  signal  to  noise  ratio  at  the  transceiver 
output  (TxOSNR),  back-to-back  bit  error  rate  vs  optical 
the 
signal 

to  noise  ratio  (BER  vs  OSNR),  and 

• 

• 

implemented  functions.  The  route  and  wavelength  used 
are given in advance, and the method for selecting them is 
out of scope. A secure channel is pre-constructed between 
the  customers  and  the  carrier,  through  which  control 
information can be exchanged. Authentication is outside 
the scope of this paper. 

the 

requirements 

Here,  we  define 

for  optical  path 
configuration  as  follows.  The  transmitting  customer  sends  an 
optical path setup request to the receiving customer. Our goal is 
to  maximize  the  performance  on  an  optical  path  through  an 
AAL.  The  performance  is  defined  as  the  bit  rate  per  optical 
frequency  range.  The  allowable  BER  was  assumed  to  be  the 
standard  threshold,  i.e.,  1  x  10-12.  The  carrier  and  customers 
cooperatively configure an optimal optical path by calculating 
link  OSNR  degradation  caused  by  amplified  spontaneous 
emission  noise  (OSNR_ase)  and  fiber  nonlinear  noise 
(OSNR_nli).  The  customers  configure 
transceiver 
parameters  (output  power,  bit  rate,  modulation  format,  FEC, 
etc.) for maximum link performance while taking into account 
the  receiver  sensibility.  The  configuration  process  is  done 
automatically, without human intervention, and should take at 
most 10 minutes to complete. 

the 

III. OPTICAL PATH DESIGN OVER AAL: A REVIEW OF EXISTING 
APPROACHES 

This section presents two existing approaches that can be used 
for optical path design over AALs and discusses the advantages 
and disadvantages of each approach. 

A. DLM: Optical path design based on link parameter 
estimation of AALs 
We use the DLM technique [2] to estimate the parameters of 
AALs.  DLM  estimates  physical  characteristics  distributed  in 
the  fiber-longitudinal  direction  by  solely  processing  the 
received  (Rx)  signals  without  traditional  analog  testing 
instruments (OTDR, OSA, etc.). For instance, the estimation of 
the fiber-longitudinal power profile (PP), gain spectra of optical 
amplifiers  (OAs),  and  frequency  responses  of  optical  filters 
have  been  successfully  demonstrated.  Unlike  analog  devices, 
DLM is capable of “multi-span” measurement, which enables 
rapid  and  cost-efficient  monitoring  of  the  AAL.  In  addition, 
DLM  visualizes  the  entire  line  system,  making  it  possible  to 
optimize  and  identify/localize  soft-failures  caused  in  link 
components such as fibers, amplifiers, and filters. In this work, 
we focus on the PP estimation (PPE). 

Fig. 2. Digital longitudinal monitoring. 

Figure 2 shows a common configuration of DLM. The key to 
PP E is the fiber nonlinearity (self-phase modulation); the PP is 

 Copyright © 2022 IEEE, Personal use is permitted. For any other purposes, permission must be obtained from the IEEE by emailing pubs-permissions@ieee.org. 

 
 
 
obtained  by  estimating  the  distance-wise  nonlinear  phase 
rotation due to their proportionality. An arbitrary signal emitted 
from the transmitter (Tx) propagates an AAL, and the received 
signal is then sent to the SDN controller, in which the distance-
wise  nonlinearity  is  estimated  through  DSP.  Note  that  no 
special  training  or  pilot  signal  is  needed  for  the  Tx  signal 
because it can be recovered at the receiver or SDN controller. 
To  estimate  the  fiber  nonlinearity  caused  in  the  link, 
transmission 
the  nonlinearity  are 
compensated  for.  The  demodulated  signals  and  the  Tx  signal 
recovered  from  symbol  decision  (decoding  and  mapping  if 
possible) and Nyquist filtering are fed into the DLM algorithms. 
The  distance-wise  nonlinear  phase  rotation  is  obtained  by 
performing least squares [2] or cross-correlation [11]. 
In this approach, the optical path is established in the following 
steps: 
1)  The Tx customer requests the carrier to establish an 

impairments  except 

optical path. 

2)  The customer sends its transceiver characteristics to the 

carrier via the secure channel. 

3)  The customer and carrier synchronously estimate AAL 

parameters. 

4)  The customer or carrier selects the transceiver mode 

using the estimated link parameters. 

5)  The customer configures the transceiver with the 

selected mode. 

requires 

receiver’s 

 The  advantage  of  this  approach  is  that,  by  inputting  the 
estimated  PP  to  existing  optical  path  design  tools,  the  main 
factors  that  degrade  the  line  system  (OSNR_ase,  OSNR_nli) 
can  be  calculated.  However,  this  approach  also  presents  the 
following  two  issues:  1)  To  calculate  the  OSNR  value  at  the 
receiver  end,  the  TxOSNR  value  is  needed  in  addition  to  the 
line system's estimated OSNR value; and 2) The analysis of the 
received  BER 
back-to-back 
the 
characteristics such as BER vs. OSNR, in addition to the line 
system  QoT.  As  described  in  Section  IV,  the  proposed 
architecture  and  protocols  enable  carriers  and  customers  to 
work  together  to  exchange  the  TxOSNR  and  back-to-back 
characteristics, so the two issues can be resolved. This enables 
more  accurate  path  designs  and  reduces  redundant  margin  as 
described in Section V. Notably, unlike analog devices, DLM 
is capable of “multi-span”  measurement,  which enables rapid 
and  cost-efficient  monitoring  of  the  AAL.  In  addition,  DLM 
visualizes the entire line system, making it possible to optimize 
and  identify/localize  soft-failures  caused  in  link  components 
such as fibers, amplifiers, and filters. However, because DLM 
uses the fiber nonlinearity to estimate the above characteristics, 
their accuracy degrades at a practical launch power [2, 11, 12].  

B. Black box approach: Optical path design based on EtE 
QoT estimation with receiver pre-FEC BER 
The  black  box  approach  selects  the  optimal  transceiver 
parameters by EtE QoT estimation with probing light without 
estimating the parameters of the AAL [5, 6, 7]. In this approach, 
the  optical  path  is  only  set  up  by  the  customers,  with  no 
involvement  from  the  carrier  except  to  prepare  an  empty 
channel. The black box approach roughly follows these steps: 

1)  The Tx customer requests the carrier to prepare an empty 

channel. 

2)  The carrier prepares the channel and notifies the 

customer of its wavelength. 

3)  The customer configures transceivers with the 

wavelength. 

4)  The customer selects the transceiver mode using the 

estimated conditions. 

5)  The customer configures the transceiver with the 

selected mode. 

The  advantage  of  the  black  box  approach  is  that  the  optical 
path  can  be  implemented  by  the  customer  alone,  thus 
simplifying the system and almost eliminating the need to work 
with the carrier. However, the QoT cannot be decomposed into 
elements  such  as  OSNR_ase  and  OSNR_nli  because  the  link 
parameters  of  the  line  systems  cannot  be  obtained,  so  the 
optimization  and  fault  isolation/location  of  these  elements 
cannot  be  performed.  This  fundamental  issue  in  service 
operation  is  difficult  to  solve  with  architectural  and  protocol 
improvements. 
Thus,  the  remainder  of  this  paper  will  focus  on  the  DLM 
approach. We utilize the GNPy open design tool for optical path 
design  [4]  with  the  QoT  at  exchanged  transceiver  parameters 
via the protocol described in Section IV, the known carrier link 
parameters,  and  the  estimated  access  link  parameters.  GNPy 
assumes a Gaussian noise approximation, which enables optical 
path design over a wide range of distances, from long-haul to 
metro, in a very short time and with sufficient accuracy. While 
[13]  has  demonstrated  QoT  maximization  with  GNPy  by 
collecting  open  line  system  (OLS)  parameters,  we  focus  on 
partially unknown OLS parameters. 

IV. PROPOSED ARCHITECTURE AND PROTOCOL 

The  architecture  and  protocol  are  designed  to  resolve  the 
issues discussed in Section III. The left-hand side of Figure 3 
shows  the  proposed  architecture.  In  order  to  minimize  the 
accuracy degradation in long-distance estimation, we divide the 
long EtE path into customer and carrier sections. To terminate 
the customer-side path at the carrier edge, we place an optical 
switch  at  the  edge  and  connect  to  a  carrier’s  measurement 
receiver.  The  controller  is  mounted  on  the  carrier  and  has  a 
consistency  check  function  and  an  EtE  path  design  function. 
The former selects common modes from the mode catalogs of 
transceivers  mounted  in  A)  and  B)  in  the  figure.  The  latter 
inputs the QoT data and transceiver information estimated by 
DLM  into  the  optical  path  design  tool  and  designs  the  EtE 
optical path. Then the optical switch reconnects the customer to 
the destination to establish the EtE path. 

The information needed to design the EtE optical path are link 
parameters in the access and carrier sections, and the capability 
of  customer  transceivers.  Here,  carrier  link  parameters  are 
generally not disclosed to customers, whereas the configurable 
modes of the customer transceiver should be accessible to the 
carrier because it is necessary to manage the quality and safety 
of  the  network.  The  proposed  system  also  allows  for  the 
connection  between  the  transceivers  of  different  vendors. 
Because  the  configurable  modes  generally  vary  by  vendor, 
generation,  and  version,  the  carrier  requires  a  mechanism  to 

 Copyright © 2022 IEEE, Personal use is permitted. For any other purposes, permission must be obtained from the IEEE by emailing pubs-permissions@ieee.org. 

 
automatically  collect  transceiver  capability  information  and 
perform consistency checks. 

Figure 3 shows the overall architecture and protocol including 
the  functional  deployment  of  the  DLM  approach.  A)  and  B) 
denote user sites A and B, respectively, and a), b), c), and d) 
denote the optical switch, measurement equipment, controller, 
and  carrier  link,  respectively.  As  shown  in  Figure  3,  all 
components are handled by the carrier's controller through the 
secure  channel.  Transceivers  A)  and  B)  are  connected  to  the 
nearest a) via AALs A and B, respectively. Both switches are 
connected by d). a) can switch the signal from the AAL to either 
b)  or  d).  The  mode  catalog  (bitrate,  modulation  format,  FEC 
type, etc.) is generated and sent to the carrier's controller (see 
upper  right  of  Figure  3).  The  controller  compares  the  mode 
catalog  received  from  A)  and  B)  to  create  a  list  of  common 

OSNR is estimated on the basis of the obtained physical layer 
parameters.  Figure  4  shows  the  experimental  system  and 
estimated PP. Two  white-box transponders  were prepared for 
deployment  at  user  sites  and  connected  in  the  configuration 
shown in the figure. The white-box transponders are based on 
the  Cassini  and  Goldstone  network  operation  system  (NOS), 
which  are  openly  specified  by  TIP,  and  the  TAI,  which 
disaggregates hardware and software in the control of coherent 
transceivers. Coherent modules from two different vendors are 
applied,  and  vendor  dependencies  are  absorbed  by  the  TAI 
library. This enables transceivers from different vendors to be 
controlled  in  a  unified  manner.  The  transmission  section 
consists of AALs A and B, which connect the carrier and the 
user,  and  the  carrier  link.  AAL  A  includes  50-km  standard 
single mode fibers (SMFs) and an erbium-doped fiber amplifier 

(EDFA). 

The optical switch can switch the signal from the AAL to the 
measurement  equipment  and  carrier  link.  We  used  the  Open 
ROADM YANG model as reference and developed a common 
control interface for abstracting multi-vendor switches. 

The  controller  in  Figure  4  is  connected  to  white-box 
transponders and optical switches via control lines and collects 
capability  and  QoT  data  from  transceivers  and  measurement 
equipment. The controller uses the GNPy to estimate the EtE 
QoT, determine the optimal configuration  with parameters  of 
all  links,  and  then  the  controller  provides  instructions  for 
opening the optical path. 

modes with which A) and B) can interconnect (see middle right 
of  Figure  3).  If  no  interconnectable  mode  exists,  an  error  is 
returned to A) and B). The controller obtains a  list of optical 
path routes from d) in advance and then switches a) to connect 
A), B), and b), as shown in the lower right of Figure 3. A), B), 
and  b)  are  test  coherent  links  to  estimate  the  QoT  of  the 
bidirectional  AAL.  Here,  functions  for  estimating  QoT  are 
implemented  in  A),  B),  and  b).  All  estimated  QoT  data  is 
collected by the controller, which then calculates the required 
values  for  the  optical  path  setup  between  A)  and  B)  for  each 
optical path route in d) using an optical path design tool. The 
controller  calculates  the  optimal  optical  path  route  and 
transceiver  configuration  by  referring  to  the  optical  path 
common mode list in d) and sets up and optimizes a) and d) to 
establish an EtE operational coherent link between A) and B). 
If no interoperable mode exists, the controller returns an error 
to A) and B). 

V. EVALUATION OF PROPOSED SCHEME 

A. Experimental Test 

We  experimentally  evaluate  the  proposed  scheme  to  verify 
whether the optical path can be setup automatically within 10 
minutes. First, the PP of the AAL is measured by DLM, and the 

 Copyright © 2022 IEEE, Personal use is permitted. For any other purposes, permission must be obtained from the IEEE by emailing pubs-permissions@ieee.org. 

 
 
link was established between the transceivers at user sites A and 
B to verify error-free operation. 

Table I summarizes the time required to set up the optical path. 
The  DLM  preprocess  is  the  demodulation  process  for 
generating inputs to the DLM as shown in Fig. 2.The DLM time 
is the time taken from the start to the end of iterative learning 
of the SSFM. The total link parameter estimation took 36 + 27 
= 63 sec. to design the optical path using GNPy, and about 73 
sec. to boot the transceiver from initial state. In total, the optical 
path was automatically constructed in about 137 sec. 

TABLE I 

Time required to set up optical path 

Time (sec) 

DLM preprocess 
DLM (Learning of SSFM) 
Optical path design 
Transceiver cold start 
Total 

36 
27 
1 
73 
137 

B. Potential of Margin Reduction 

We  have  shown  how  the  proposed  scheme  can  estimate  the 
link  parameters  of  an  optical  path  and  select  the  optimal 
configuration.  Because 
the  AAL  characteristics  can  be 
estimated  by  DLM,  the  OSNR  margin  under  the  worst-case 
conditions  can  be  avoided. The  OSNR  margins  that  can  be 
reduced  by  the  proposed  scheme  are  the  OSNR_ase  and  the 
OSNR_nli margins. The former is the margin for power losses 
caused by an aging OA, connector losses, fusion splicing losses, 
etc. The latter is the margin for nonlinear noise. In this section, 
we discuss the extent to  which the former power loss  margin 
can be reduced by the proposed scheme. 

Here,  we  define  the  OSNR  margin  as  the  amount  of  OSNR 
degradation at the Rx when additional 2-dB losses occur in all 
spans. The assumptions of the system are shown in the  upper 
part of Figure 5. The fiber input power was uniformly set to 0 
dBm for all spans, and the span loss was assumed to be 16 dB 
under  normal  conditions  (0.2  dB/km,  equivalent  to  80  km 
standard) and 18 dB under worst-case conditions when 2 dB of 
optical power degradation occurs. The gain of the OA was set 
to compensate for all span loss, and the NF was set to 5.0 dB. 
The signal was 64 GBd with a wavelength of 1550 nm. 

Fig. 5. Results of OSNR margin analysis. 

The OSNR margins as a function of the total span number are 
shown in the lower part of Figure 5. Here, Tx OSNR means the 
OSNR  at  the  output  of  the  coherent  transceiver.  In  a  longer 

Fig. 4. Experimental system and estimated power profile. 

First, the PP of AAL A is estimated by DLM by connecting 
the optical switch as indicated by (1) in Figure 4; the PP is used 
to estimate the fiber loss/OA gain for the input to GNPy. In this 
experiment, an offline experimental system is used to perform 
DLM, but in the future, it will be possible to perform DLM with 
only  a  commercially  available  transceiver.  The  transmitter  is 
installed on the carrier side, and when DLM starts, the signal is 
sent to AAL A via an optical switch to monitor the AAL. We 
used the same offline system as in [2]. The captured waveform 
on the customer side was sent to a network controller (PC), and 
demodulation and PPE were performed there. For the PPE, we 
used  the  gradient  learning  of  the  split-step  Fourier  method 
(SSFM)  for  the  Manakov  equation  [2].  The  DLM  output  of 
AAL A is shown at the bottom of Figure 4. Note that the vertical 
axis is the true optical power in dBm. The estimated PP closely 
matches  the  true  profile.  The  optical  fiber  loss,  optical  fiber 
input  power,  and  intermediate  amplifier  gain  were  estimated 
from  the  obtained  PP  by  linear  fitting.  While  the  true  values 
were 0.186 dB/km optical fiber loss, 5.0 dBm optical fiber input 
power,  and  9.42  amplifier  gain),  the  estimated  values  were 
0.175 dB/km (1st span) and 0.212 dB/km (2nd span) for optical 
fiber loss, 4.47 dBm (1st  span) and 4.54 dBm (2nd span)  for 
input power, and 8.83 dB for the amplifier gain. For the carrier 
link, the link parameter is assumed to be known because it is 
managed by the carrier. For simplicity, only AAL A is used for 
DLM estimation, but the same method can be used to estimate 
the transmission quality for the carrier link. In addition, for the 
transceiver  performance  parameters  (TxOSNR,  BER  vs. 
OSNR),  we assume that their values are known because they 
can  be  obtained  from  the  controller  by  using  the  architecture 
and protocol described in Section IV. 

After DLM for the AAL is completed, the switch is changed 
to (2), and the link parameters of AAL A, B, and the carrier link 
are  input  to  GNPy.  The  EtE  transmission  quality  generalized 
signal  to  noise  ratio  (GSNR)  was  estimated.  The  transceiver 
used  in  this  experiment  supports  100Gbps  dual-polarization 
(DP) QPSK 32GBd and 200Gbps DP-16QAM 32GBd. In this 
experiment, the GSNR total was large enough to achieve error-
free operation even with 200 Gbps, so the 200 Gbps mode with 
a  high  bit  rate  per  optical  frequency  bandwidth  was 
automatically selected as the optimal configuration. An optical 

 Copyright © 2022 IEEE, Personal use is permitted. For any other purposes, permission must be obtained from the IEEE by emailing pubs-permissions@ieee.org. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
distance  regime,  the  effect  of  the  in-line  amplifier  becomes 
dominant.  In  such  a  regime,  an  additional  span  loss  of  2  dB 
always causes an OSNR degradation of nearly 2 dB. In the case 
of short spans, TxOSNR is the dominant deciding factor for the 
received OSNR, so the effect of the additional 2-dB span loss 
is smaller. However, when high TxOSNR is assumed, the effect 
of ASE noise in the in-line amplifier becomes dominant and the 
required OSNR margin approaches 2 dB. 

Assuming DLM has infinite  accuracy, these OSNR  margins 
can  be  eliminated.  The  accuracy  of  the  optical  power  level 
diagram  estimated  by  DLM  is  discussed  in  [2]  and  [12]. 
Although the accuracy of DLM at this time is not as high as that 
of conventional analog measuring instruments such as OTDR, 
it  is  still  a  developing  technology,  and  improvements  in 
accuracy  have  been  discussed  in  [12].  The  above  OSNR 
margins can be reduced in the future when DLM can achieve 
accuracy comparable to that of OTDRs. 

VI. REMAINING RESEARCH ISSUES 

While  the  DLM  approach  offers  various  advantages,  the 
challenge  is  developing  measurement  equipment  and  optical 
switches in the carrier network at low cost. In our experiment, 
a single wavelength was used for simplicity, but it is necessary 
to examine the effects of the wavelength dependence of OAs 
and fiber nonlinear effects when deploying DLM in WDM. It is 
also  necessary  to  solve  problems  related  to  accommodation 
design, such as available wavelength assignment in the carrier 
link and optical path route design, which are being discussed at 
the IOWN Global Forum [14]. 

The number of transceiver modes has been increasing as DSP 
LSIs  evolve.  There  is  a  need  for  a  method  of  efficiently 
selecting  the  optimal  mode  without  measuring  the  QoT 
characteristics  for  each  mode  [4].  A  method  of  selecting  the 
optimal one without trying all of them, which is only a selection 
of the modulation format, has been studied in [6]. This method 
also requires the BER-OSNR characteristics of the customer's 
transceiver,  but  there  is  no  open  API  to  obtain  them.  If  the 
transceiver characteristics can be obtained, it should be possible 
to  design  optical  paths  that  take  into  account  the  individual 
differences of transceivers, which is expected to reduce margins 
or improve frequency utilization efficiency. 

Regarding the confidentiality of the link parameters between 
the customer and the carrier, in this paper, we assumed that the 
carrier obtains the estimated link parameters, but the customer 
may  not  allow  the  carrier  to  obtain  the  parameters.  In  virtual 
networks, cryptographic techniques such as secure multi-party 
computation have been proposed to set up virtual paths while 
keeping the information secret [15]. A similar approach may be 
used  in  optical  transmission  networks  to  select  optimal 
transceiver mode without revealing the link parameters of the 
optical path. 
 As described in Section I, optical path setting requests may be 
concentrated  on  carriers  as 
frequency  of  optical 
transmission  network  usage  and  the  number  of  optical  lines 
increase. Such concentrated requests are often seen in mobile 
networks,  where  admission  control  has  been  introduced. 
However, as seen in our experiments, optical path setting takes 
more  time  than  mobile  terminal  registration,  so  it  cannot  be 
used as is for optical path setting. In particular, at the time of a 

the 

large-scale  failure due to a disaster,  not only do all terminals 
request re-connection again upon recovery, but the estimation 
process cannot be omitted because the link parameters of the 
optical path may have changed due to the disaster. Thus, there 
is a need for a new admission control that is optimized for the 
optical path setting. 

VII. CONCLUSION 

We  proposed  an  architecture  and  protocol  for  cooperative 
optical  path  design  between  carriers  and  customers.  The 
protocol utilizes DLM, a technique for estimating optical link 
parameters,  to  automatically  configure  the  optical  path  with 
optimal QoT between customer-owned transceivers connected 
via  AAL  whose  link  parameters  are  unknown  and  carrier-
managed networks. DLM enables estimation of OSNR_ase and 
OSNR_nli  and  reduces  the  margin  for  receiver-end  OSNR 
degradation  by  up  to  2  dB  for  each  span,  assuming  a  2  dB 
increase  in  span  loss.  Our  experiments  verified  that  the 
proposed  architecture  and  protocol  enable  the  customer  to 
optimize and establish an EtE optical path including AALs in 
about 137 seconds. 

REFERENCES 

[1]  M. Filer et al., “Low-margin optical networking at cloud scale,” Journal of 
optical communications and networking, vol. 11, issue 10, pp. C94-C108, 
2019. 

[2]  T.    Sasai  et  al.,  “Digital  longitudinal  monitoring  of  optical  fiber 
communication  link,”  Journal of  lightwave  technol.,  vol.  40, no. 8,  Apr. 
2022. 

[3]  T. Tanimura, S. Yoshida, K. Tajima, S. Oda, and T. Hoshida, “Concept and 
implementation  study  of  advanced  DSP-based  fiber-longitudinal  optical 
power profile monitoring toward optical network tomography,” Journal of 
optical communications and networking, vol. 13, no. 10, Oct. 2021. 
[4]  V. Curri, “GNPy model of the physical layer for open and disaggregated 
optical networking,” Journal of optical communications and networking, 
vol. 14, issue 6, pp. C92-C104, 2022. 

[5]  K. Kaeval et al., “QoT assessment of the optical spectrum as a service in 
disaggregated network scenarios,” Journal of optical communications and 
networking, vol. 13, no. 10, Oct. 2021. 

[6]  K. Anazawa et al., “Automatic modulation-format selection with white-box 

transponders: design and field trial,” OECC 2021, paper JS2A.14. 

[7]  A.  Gouin  et  al.,  “Real-time  optical 

transponder  prototype  with 
autonegotiation protocol for software defined networks,” Journal of optical 
communications and networking, vol. 13, no. 9, Sep. 2021. 

[8]  L. Alahdab et al., “Alien wavelengths over optical transport networks,” J. 

opt. commun. netw., vol. 10, no. 11 Nov. 2018. 

[9]  L.  Liu  et  al.,  “Field  and  lab  trials  of  PCE-based  OSNR-aware  dynamic 
restoration in multi-domain GMPLS-enabled translucent WSON,” Optics 
express, vol. 19, no. 27 Dec. 2011. 

[10]  A. M. Fagertun, B. Skjoldstrup, “Flexible transport network expansion via 
open WDM interface,” international conference on computing, networking 
and communications, optical and grid networking symposium, 2013. 
[11]  T.  Tanimura,  S.  Yoshida,  K.  Tajima,  S.  Oda,  and  T.  Hoshida,  “Fiber-
longitudinal anomaly position identification over multi-span transmission 
link out of receiver-end signals,” J. lightwave technol., vol. 38, issue 9, pp. 
2726-2733, 2020. 

[12]  T. Sasai, M. Nakamura, E. Yamazaki, and Y. Kisaka, “Precise longitudinal 
power monitoring over 2,080km enabled by step size selection of split step 
fourier method,” OFC 2022, paper Th1C.4. 

[13]  G.  Borraccini,  “Using  QoT  for  open  line  controlling  and  modulation 
format deployment: an experimental proof of concept,” ECOC 2020. 
[14]  IOWN  global  forum  technical  paper,  “Open  ALL-Photonic  network 

functional architecture 1.0,” Jan. 2022.  

[15]  T.  Mano  et  al.,  “Efficient  virtual  network  optimization  across  multiple 
domains  without  revealing  private  information,”  IEEE  transactions  on 
network and service management, vol. 13, issue 3, Sep. 2016. 

 Copyright © 2022 IEEE, Personal use is permitted. For any other purposes, permission must be obtained from the IEEE by emailing pubs-permissions@ieee.org. 

 
BIOGRAPHIES 

Hideki  Nishizawa  received  B.E.  and  M.E. degrees  in  physics 
from  Chiba  University,  Chiba,  Japan,  in  1994  and  1996, 
respectively.  In  1996,  he  joined  NTT  Laboratories,  Japan, 
where  he  has  been  engaged  in  research  on  open  and 
disaggregated optical systems. 

Takeo  Sasai  received  B.E.  and  M.E.  degrees  in  electrical 
engineering from the University of Tokyo, Japan, in 2014 and 
2016, respectively. In 2016, he joined NTT Laboratories, Japan, 
where  he  has  been  engaged  in  the  digital  longitudinal 
monitoring of optical fiber link. 

Takeru  Inoue  received  his  Ph.D.  in  information  science  from 
Kyoto University, Japan, in 2006.  He joined NTT Laboratories 
in 2000 and currently serves as a Distinguished Researcher. 

Kazuya Anazawa received his B.E. and M.E. degrees from the 
University of Aizu in 2016 and 2018, respectively. He joined 
NTT  Laboratories  in  2018.  His  current  research  interests  are 
autonomous control of optical transport networks. 

Toru Mano received B.E. and M.E. degrees from the 
University of Tokyo in 2009 and 2011, respectively. He joined 
NTT Labs in 2011. He received the Ph.D. degree in computer 
science and information technology from the Hokkaido 
University in 2020. His research interests are network 
architectures, network optimization, softwarization of 
networking. 

Kei Kitamura received B.E., M.E. degrees in information and 
communication  engineering  from  the  University  of  Electro-
Communications, Tokyo, Japan, in 2008 and 2010, respectively. 
In 2010, he joined NTT Laboratories and has been engaged in 
research on network interfaces and large-capacity transmission 
systems. 

Yoshiaki  Sone  received  his  M.E.  degree  in  electronics 
engineering from Tohoku University, Miyagi, in 2003. In 2003, 
he joined NTT Laboratories to focus his research on network 
engineering technologies for optical transport networks. 

Tetsuro  Inui  received  his  B.E.  degree  in  electric  engineering 
from  Waseda  University,  Tokyo,  Japan  in  1995  and  M.E. 
degree in electronic engineering from the University of Tokyo, 
in 1998. In 1998, he joined NTT Laboratories, Japan, where he 
has  been  engaged  in  research  on  high-speed  optical  transport 
systems and optical transport network architecture. 

Koichi Takasugi received the B.E. degree in computer science 
from  Tokyo  Institute  of  Technology  in1995,  the  M.E.  degree 
from Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology in 
1997 and Ph.D. in engineering from Waseda University in 2004.  
In 1997, he joined NTT Laboratories, Japan, where he has been 
engaged in research on wireless and optical transport networks. 

 Copyright © 2022 IEEE, Personal use is permitted. For any other purposes, permission must be obtained from the IEEE by emailing pubs-permissions@ieee.org. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
