Driverless road-marking Machines: Ma(r)king the
Way towards the Future of Mobility

Domagoj Majstorovi´c
Institute of Automotive Technology
Technical University of Munich
Garching bei M¨unchen, Germany
domagoj.majstorovic@tum.de

Frank Diermeyer
Institute of Automotive Technology
Technical University of Munich
Garching bei M¨unchen, Germany
diermeyer@tum.de

2
2
0
2

p
e
S
7

]

O
R
.
s
c
[

1
v
1
1
2
3
0
.
9
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Driverless road maintenance could potentially be
its stakeholders, with the key goals
highly beneﬁcial to all
being increased safety for all road participants, more efﬁcient
trafﬁc management, and reduced road maintenance costs such
that the standard of the road infrastructure is sufﬁcient for it
to be used in Automated Driving (AD). This paper addresses
how the current state of the technology could be expanded to
reach those goals. Within the project ‘System for Teleoperated
Road-marking’ (SToRM), using the road-marking machine as
the system, different operation modes based on teleoperation
were discussed and developed. Furthermore, a functional system
overview considering both hardware and software elements was
experimentally validated with an actual road-marking machine
and should serve as a baseline for future efforts in this and
similar areas.

Index Terms—driverless, automated, road-marking, mainte-

nance, teleoperation

I. INTRODUCTION

In most countries, roads are the major type of transport
infrastructure for both freight and passengers, with road
networks facilitating transport services and making travel
more time/energy efﬁcient while reducing the overall costs
of trade. They are built in all kinds of land topography,
diverse geographical locations and are affected by weather
and different natural occurrences such as ﬂooding and land-
slides. Additionally, their condition deteriorates over time
from wear and tear caused by trafﬁc and, often, neglect.
To achieve the continuity of road transport beneﬁts, road
infrastructure needs to be continuously maintained in a good
condition. This maintenance includes different activities such
as road paving, lane painting, paint and bead striping, asphalt
cleaning, patch ﬁlling, sealing of cracks, grass mowing,
snow sweeping, sign (re-)installation, etc. [1] While the
requirements for road maintenance vary from place to place,
it is always a continuous process that needs to meet speciﬁc
requirements to ensure the safety of all road participants.

A. Motivation

The performance of road maintenance is often dangerous
for both trafﬁc and maintenance crews. Studies in recent
years have shown that the construction zones in and around
highway areas are associated with an increase in death
and injuries [2, 3]. Apart from safety, efﬁciency is another
keyword for highway construction zones. Speed limits and
full lane closures imposed by infrastructure authorities are
necessary to protect both road workers and road users,
leading to congestion and delays. [4]

Given these negative trafﬁc impacts, the idea has emerged
of replacing road workers with driverless maintenance ve-
hicles. This idea has become even more relevant in recent
years given the increase in research and development (R&D)
activities in the ﬁeld of teleoperation and autonomous driving
of passenger vehicles. Huang [1] has conducted a feasibility
study of driverless maintenance in highway construction
zones in the Netherlands and showed that employing such
vehicles as part of the road maintenance chain would have a
multitude of positive side effects for all stakeholders. Table I
lists some of the possible beneﬁts for the major shareholders.
Other shareholders, such as vehicle authorities, research in-
stitutions, insurance companies, vehicle manufacturers, etc.,
would also beneﬁt from utilizing these technologies.

B. State of Technology

Over the course of the last two decades, there has been a
lot of R&D aimed at bringing some level of automation to
different road maintenance tasks with the main goal of im-
proving safety and work efﬁciency while reducing operating
costs. As long ago as 2007, an autonomous weeder platform,
previously used for agricultural activities in Netherlands, was
introduced as a system for a case study assessing the potential
for autonomous road maintenance [5]. The study showed that
the technology at the time was not mature enough to achieve
driverless sweeping/mowing, and further R&D was needed.
In 2013 Japan Automobile Research Institute and Naka
Nippon Expressway ﬁrst attempted to introduce automated
driving technology into road maintenance activities by use
of a vehicle for automated cleaning of tunnel infrastructure.
This resulted in a signiﬁcant reduction in downtime [6].
In 2015, Stolte et al. [7] introduced a prototype of a driver-

TABLE I
ESTIMATED BENEFITS FOR THE MAJOR STAKEHOLDERS THROUGH
UTILIZATION OF THE DRIVERLESS ROAD MAINTENANCE TECHNOLOGY

Stakeholder

Beneﬁt

Road Maintenance
Crew

Improved
maintenance.

safety

and

efﬁciency

of

Road Trafﬁc

Improved safety and trafﬁc ﬂow (time
efﬁciency).

Road Infrastructure
Authority

Improved safety, trafﬁc management, and
infrastructure readiness for adoption of
AD technologies, while reducing relative
maintenance costs.

 
 
 
 
 
 
less protection vehicle that was supposed to support road
maintenance activities and autonomously follow the working
vehicle at a close distance and low speed of approximately 10
km/h. They introduced various operation modes that served
as a basis for various hazard assessments in later research
(HAZOP, FMEA, etc.) [8, 9]. In 2017 NEXCO, one of the
operators of expressways and toll roads in Japan, presented
an automated snowplow vehicle. A recent video demonstrates
the current state of technology in which the GPS-guided
vehicle autonomously removes snow from the road [10].

As one of the main road maintenance activities, the process
of road-marking has also received a certain level of attention.
In 2016, the company STiM from Belarus introduced self-
driving road-marking machine, ‘Kontur 700TPK’. In a video
[11], they demonstrated a process of driverless paint applica-
tion in which the vehicle presumably followed a given route
using GPS-tracking. However, a lack of information makes
it difﬁcult to assess levels of system maturity and adoption
in the industry. In 2018 Danish company TinyMobileRobots
introduced a small GPS-guided robotic vehicle that can paint
pre-markings1 onto the road. However, this vehicle can only
be used to assist the overall painting process because it
cannot (re-)paint the road marking itself [12]. Apart from a
general motivation, the need for such driverless road-marking
machines comes also from regulations such as ‘Work Zone
Trafﬁc Control Guidelines for Maintenance Operations’ [13]
or ASR 5.2 [14] that specify a certain lateral spacing
between a manned road-marking vehicle and the trafﬁc to
ensure safety. In practice, this means that narrow construction
sites require full closure to meet requirements given by the
speciﬁcation, which ultimately leads to inefﬁcient trafﬁc ﬂow
and increased costs.

To date, road-marking machines have not been ofﬁcially
used in a driverless fashion on public roads - especially not
on roads without permanent separation from the trafﬁc. This
motivated the German Central Innovation Program (ZIM) to
support the Project ‘System for Teleoperated Road-marking’
(SToRM). The main goal of the project was to develop a
driverless road-marking machine capable of performing road-
marking maintenance tasks that satisﬁes both performance
and safety standards.

C. Contributions

There are three main goals of driverless maintenance:
increased safety of all road participants, more efﬁcient trafﬁc
management, and reduced road maintenance costs that com-
ply with the infrastructure level required for the adoption
of AD-powered mobility. The aim of this paper is to give
a perspective on how the current state of technology could
be expanded to achieve those goals. The paper presents the
driverless road-marking machine from the system perspec-
tive considering both hardware and software elements as
well as integration within the end-user ecosystem. Presented
operation modes are based on teleoperation and have been
validated on the experimental vehicle developed within the
scope of the ‘SToRM’ project that provides a baseline for
further efforts in this and similar areas.

1Pre-markings are used as guides on freshly paved roads to assist in the

road-marking process.

II. SYSTEM OVERVIEW
Compared to complex scenarios for highly-automated
passenger vehicles such as urban environments, operating
scenarios for road-marking machines have relatively simple
constraints. The vehicle operates in an isolated and restricted
area, nominally without either static or dynamic objects it
the vehicle still has to be
could collide with. However,
able to perceive the environment and have suitable safety
measures in place for unmanned operation on public roads.
These safety concepts have to account for possible system
failures (both hardware and software), unwanted vehicle be-
havior such as lane/road departure, and unanticipated events
caused by third parties. The driving trajectory is deﬁned by
road topology and can be scaled from quasi-straight roads
with fast curves (e.g., highways), country roads with slower
curves, to urban roads with slow curves and turns at different
angles. Additionally, vehicle dynamics are also considered
to be trivial as the vehicle operates with velocities of no
more than 7 m/s. On the other hand, road-marking machines
are equipped with a paint application module and need
to perform road-marking tasks, which introduces a speciﬁc
added complexity. Table II lists the three main operational
scenarios:

TABLE II
MAIN ROAD-MARKING OPERATIONAL SCENARIOS

Scenario

Description

Repainting old markings

Painting new markings

Existing old markings are used as
guidelines.

(a) The road has been pre-marked
with guidelines that assist the paint-
ing process.

(b) The system uses GPS-data for
guidance.

length, width,

Different parameters and procedures have to be prepared
and monitored during the application process such as sprayed
line quality (positioning,
thickness, etc.),
reﬂective bead application (volume, spread quality, etc.),
changing paint, reﬁlling paint tanks, etc. This complexity
means that even if the vehicle can mark roads autonomously
on its own, a certain level of expert remote assistance and/or
remote monitoring will always be required. For these reasons
teleoperation has emerged as a technology that can introduce
driverless operation mode to road-marking vehicles and help
scale the level of their autonomy.

A. Functional Description

A typical operational scenario for a driverless road-
marking machine appears as follows: machine is transferred
to a construction site. Having arrived at the location, both
vehicle and application systems are checked and prepared
for the operation. Once ready, the operator drives it remotely
to the location where the road is to be marked. The road-
marking process can now start. Depending on the mode
of operation, a vehicle accelerates to reach the operating
velocity either independently, or while being remotely driven
by the operator. At this point, paint application will start.
Once ﬁnished,
the vehicle comes to a standstill and is
returned to the safe zone under the remote control of the
operator where a new mission can be prepared.

B. Operation Modes and adopted Taxonomy

Following the most recent classiﬁcation of teleoperation
interaction concepts [15, 16, 17, 18], ﬁve modes of operation
have been identiﬁed and adopted as a base for operating
driverless road-marking machines. Corresponding state tran-
sitions based on the work of Stolte et al. [7] are shown in
Fig. 1.

Fig. 1. Operation modes of a driverless road-marking machine. State
transitions based on the work of [7].

Manual Mode allows the vehicle to be manually driven
by an on-board human driver. However, as the (driverless)
technology matures, this mode, together with its hardware
interfaces (steering wheel, pedals, etc.), will eventually be
removed from the vehicle because it will no longer be
necessary. In Remote Driving Mode, the remote operator has
full control over the vehicle and its paint application system.
This mode, as well as all the other remote operation modes,
has speciﬁc system requirements, interfaces and features,
both hardware, and software in order to successfully fulﬁll
the expected driving and paint application objectives. Remote
Assistance Mode is a semi-automated mode in which a
vehicle is capable of carrying out certain driving and/or
paint application tasks autonomously, while being actively
supported by a remote human operator. This remote support
can include a clear division of tasks between the operator
and machine, or it might be realized in a shared control
fashion [19, 20]. It is anticipated that there is no one single
conﬁguration that will be ideal for use in all operational
scenarios. Instead, there might be a multitude of different
conﬁgurations depending on road topology, road-marking
type, machine/application system performance, or even the
operator’s personal choice. From the vehicle automation
point of view, Remote Monitoring Mode represents the
ultimate mode in which the vehicle has full control and can
perform both driving and application objectives simultane-
ously. The role of the operator is now completely decoupled
and relaxed to the point where he/she merely oversees the
work progress with limited intervention options. Finally, Safe
Halt Mode incorporates a set of procedures that ensure the
safety of the system. A vehicle can transition into this mode
from any of the previously mentioned modes, either through
operator intervention or by detecting violations of functional
system boundaries and/or technical failures in the system.
Table III provides an overview of the adopted taxonomy.

TABLE III
ADOPTED TAXONOMY

Term Description

N
O

I
T
A
R
E
P
O
E
L
E
T

REMOTE
MONITORING

Remote operator monitors the system
with limited intervention options. High
level of vehicle autonomy.

REMOTE
ASSISTANCE

REMOTE
DRIVING

Vehicle receives active remote assis-
tance from the operator, while still be-
ing responsible for some parts of the
driving/application objectives.

Vehicle is under full remote control.

MANUAL MODE

Operator is on-board of the vehicle and
manually operates it.

C. Road-marking Vehicle and its Sensor Stack

There are now a large number of different teleoperated
and/or automated vehicle types that have been introduced
by the industry or are the result of research by academic
institutions. However, road-marking vehicles of the type
discussed in this paper have received a very limited to non-
existent coverage as described in Section I-B. Based on
workshops carried out within the scope of project ‘SToRM’,
below, we present a proposal detailing the hardware and
software required to overcome this shortcoming.

Road-marking vehicles are usually realized in two dif-
ferent fashions: either as a lorry that has been retroﬁtted
with the paint application system or as a fully-ﬂedged road-
marking vehicle with its signature look as shown in Fig. 2,
both types having their own pros and cons mostly related
to paint application speciﬁcs and transportation convenience.
Sensors required for driverless road-marking can be divided
into two main groups: First group of sensors enables the
driving task (both teleoperated and automated) and safety
aspects, while the second group supports the paint application
process and its Quality Assurance (QA). Fig. 2 illustrates
one such vehicle with marked positions of different sensors.
Positions designated with circles represent the ﬁrst group of
sensors, while the square-shaped marks denote the second
group. Position A denotes a 360◦ visual coverage of the
environment based on a multi-camera setup. Position D de-
notes a LiDAR sensor that scans the front corridor checking
for obstacles. Additionally, such a system could use a set
of ultrasound sensors to improve the navigation on narrow
sites. Finally, position E denotes the real-time kinematics
sensor (GPS-RTK) used for global localization. As part of
the second sensor group, position B reveals the camera with
its corresponding ﬁeld of view. This camera is positioned
perpendicular to the road, and monitors the freshly painted
road mark. It provides a video feed to QA software modules
that assess the line quality against required standards and
norms. The second sensor C in this group is a pitched
forward-facing camera which streams a video feed into
spray gun control modules that estimate the offset between
positions of the spray gun and the tracking line. Finally,
pentagon-shaped positions display some speciﬁc points of
interest, for example, position G denotes the spray gun of

the paint application system, while positions H and
denote a road before and after the process of paint spraying.

I

TELEOPERATIONMANUALMODEREMOTEDRIVINGREMOTEASSISTANCEREMOTEMONITORINGSAFEHALTFig. 2. Proposed sensor setup to utilize driverless technology on conventional road-marking machines

D. Software Modules

Driverless road vehicles are usually developed from the
perspective of self-driving ability utilizing the well-known
sense-plan-act paradigm [21, 22]. This means that the vehicle
has to perceive the environment, localize itself, detect and
track other road participants, perform decision-making at
all
levels, and execute decisions. Teleoperation generally
complements this architecture by playing a smaller part
that deals with unforeseen events and edge cases. However,
there are a number of reasons why teleoperation can be
considered of major importance vis-a-vis driverless road-
marking machines. First, the current level of maturity of
this technology is very low. Initial use of teleoperation as
a means for gaining experience and gradually implementing
the sense-plan-act features might be a reasonable way of
scaling the level of autonomy with reduced overheads and
in a much more efﬁcient manner. Second, the process of
road marking, while a seemingly trivial task, has a lot of
ﬁne details that make it difﬁcult to immediately jump to
a high level of automation. Use of skilled road-marking
operators to teleoperate such machines is an excellent way of
gaining insights about relevant working scenarios, gathering
the learning data for the development of different software
features, and exploring other initially unknown but important
aspects. There follows an introduction of high-level software
components and features as depicted in Fig. 3 which are
needed to use the previously identiﬁed Operation Modes.

1) REMOTE DRIVING: This mode is suitable for marking
both old roads, and new roads with existing pre-markings
(see Table II). At its core, the system is based on the teleop-
eration module named ‘Teleoperation Base’ which brings in
all necessary features to establish the link with the remote
vehicle, receive and display sensor data, and send operator
commands. The ‘Road-marking Driving Interface’ extends
the core module with the low-level vehicle communication.
Additionally, it improves the operator’s interface with fea-
tures such as lane/line projections which guide the operator
effectively during teleoperation in Augmented Reality (AR)
fashion. Finally, the ‘Road-marking Application and QA’
module introduces vision-based line quality assessment that
can be both displayed and stored as measurement results.

2) REMOTE ASSISTANCE: This mode features semi-
automated driving/paint application where both remote oper-
ator and the vehicle work together. Different task divisions
are possible with various software feature ﬂavors, but in
essence either the remote operator will carry out the applica-
tion task with the driving part being performed by the vehicle
(RA†) or vice versa (RA‡). The ‘Automated Road-marking
Driving Interface’ introduces functionalities that allow the
vehicle to follow the speciﬁed path on its own. Such a
trajectory as depicted in Fig. 2 with a position F , can
be produced either by use of speciﬁed plain GPS points, or
vision-based detection of old markings. The latter has many
beneﬁts because it can complement other functionalities and
extend the operating domain in GPS-denied areas such as
tunnels, etc. The ‘Automated Road-marking Application and
QA’ relates to automated paint application. The system is
capable of measuring the exact length of sprayed markings.
The feed from camera C is used to estimate the offset
between the tracking line and spray gun to minimize the
overall path tracking error. Additionally,
the system will
automatically adjust the vertical position of the spraying
head to ensure the newly sprayed line width remains within
standard limits.

3) REMOTE MONITORING: The vehicle is capable of
carrying out all the previously introduced features (on its
own), thus effectively covering the full working envelope,
while the operator merely monitors progress and has limited
intervention options.

Fig. 3. Software modules needed to utilize identiﬁed Operation Modes

DrivingtasksensoricsPaintapplicationtasksensoricsOtherspecificsBCGIHFAEDTeleoperationBaseRoad-markingDrivingInterfaceAutomatedRoad-markingDrivingInterfaceREMOTEASSISTANCE†REMOTEASSISTANCE‡REMOTEMONITORINGREMOTEDRIVINGAutomatedRoad-markingApplicationandQARoad-markingApplicationandQAIII. PROOF OF CONCEPT

Project ‘SToRM’ offered a framework to develop and
experimentally verify the proposed concept of a driverless
road-marking machine system. The following section gives
details on implemented functionalities and features, as well
as, overall system performance.

A. Vehicle and Sensor Stack

Fig. 4 shows two experimental vehicles used as prototypes.
Fig. 4a shows a passenger car and Fig. 4b shows a current
road-marking machine. Both systems were equipped with
commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) sensors in a manner similar
to that portrayed in Fig. 2. Additionally, Table IV gives a
sensor overview and indicates some minor setup differences
between the vehicles.

(a) Experimental passenger vehicle next to improvised road markings
during development phase testing various software features

TABLE IV
EXPERIMENTAL VEHICLES - HARDWARE OVERVIEW

Position

Description

Product

A

B

C

D

E

G

Vehicle Control
Camera

FLIR BFS U3-28S5M-C
& EO 5mm f/2.8 FL

Quality Assessment
Camera

FLIR BFS U3-28S5M-C
& EO 16mm f/1.8 HPr

Spray Gun Control
Camera

FLIR BFS U3-28S5M-C
& EO 16mm f/1.8 HPr

LiDAR

GPS-RTK System

Velodyne Puck*
Livox Mid-40†

OXTS RT3000 v3*
Emlid RS+†

Spray Gun

N/A*
Winter Markiertechnik†

* Passenger vehicle,

† Road-marking vehicle

2) Road-marking Driving Interface: The software base in
subsection III-B1 has been extended to create a communica-
tion interface with the road-marking vehicle shown in Fig. 4b
with the hardware interface being realized using two CAN-
BUS networks. Fig. 5 indicates how the control center was
conceptualized. The human operator uses a joystick, and a
combination of touchscreens and panels with physical but-
tons to interact with the vehicle, while observing the system
and sensor feeds via a notebook computer. Additionally, the
projection module of the ToD Software [24] has been adapted
to project the spraying line and precisely guide the remote
operator during teleoperation process as shown in Fig. 6.

(b) Experimental road-marking machine during teleoperation on the
premises of the Gr¨un company in Siegen, Germany

Fig. 4. Vehicles used for development and experimental veriﬁcation of the
presented driverless road-marking vehicle concept

B. Software Modules

1) Teleoperation Base: Conceptually inspired by the sys-
tem design introduced by [23], this module utilizes a highly
modular open-source software stack for teleoperated driving
based on Robot Operating System (ROS) middleware devel-
oped and maintained by Schimpe et al. [24].

Fig. 5. Concept of the control center for teleoperation of road-marking
machines

Fig. 6. Steering wheel angle-based projections of the spraying course in
two separate scenarios

BCAEDBCGEAD3) Road-marking Application and QA: This module has
been developed and integrated to help the operator assess
the spraying performance. It receives the image stream from
the camera B and analyses the image, while effectively
measuring the line width. This information, together with the
snapshot of the road-mark, is then transferred to the control
center where the remote operator can evaluate the results.
Fig. 7a shows one frame produced by the module (left) and
a corresponding 15-seconds long drive detection/estimation
sample (right). The module has a number of subroutines that
ensure robust and reliable width estimation. Given that the
system is equipped with a (previously mentioned) downward-
facing camera B , a vision-based velocity estimation module
has been developed with the main aim being to provide
an accurate velocity estimate. In this way the vehicle can
receive reliable velocity information even in GPS-denied
areas such as tunnels. Here, a custom Lucas-Kanade-based
optical ﬂow algorithm was developed. Coupled with ﬁltering
heuristics it proved to provide a reliable velocity estimation
up to 8 m/s for a fraction of the price of advanced GPS
systems. Fig. 7b shows the performance of the velocity
estimation compared to the baseline OXTS RT3000v3 GPS-
RTK system. However, because it is heavily dependent on
good lighting conditions to keep the exposure time as low
as possible to avoid motion-blur, a whole-day missions or
activities during different seasons might require an external
source of light. Finally, a dataset with camera image streams
has been published to support the future development of
algorithms for this and similar application(s) [25].

4) Automated Road-marking Driving Interface: This
module introduces three major software features that make
automated driving possible. The ﬁrst one is the deep neural
network based detection of old markings. The idea is to
detect those markings and use them as a basis to construct
reference (tracking) trajectories. However, since old road
markings are usually damaged and in a bad shape, such
detection is not possible with conventional methods. Instead,
a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) was trained on
a custom image dataset that was manually collected and
labeled. Once deployed, the system demonstrated robust and
efﬁcient trajetory estimation. Fig. 8 shows the three image
samples, namely: dataset image (a), inference result (b), and
an estimated path shown in red (c) that is then converted
into a trajectory within the local coordinate system. The
second feature is support for GPS-based trajectories which
makes the road marking process much more convenient and
efﬁcient because it does not require any preexisting marks or
preparation procedures. Finally, the third feature is a tracking
controller that generates the vehicle control signals to track
the given trajectory. Here a number of controller strategies
have been deployed and evaluated within the kinematics
bicycle model framework, such as PID, Stanley, Pure Pursuit,
Adaptive Pure Pursuit, etc.

(a) Assessment of the spraying performance on a 15-second detection
sample. A frame showcasing the width estimation alogrithm (left).
Estimated line width per frame (right).

(b) Vision-based velocity estimation (green) compared with the ground-
truth velocity (black) in the upper graph, and the corresponding estimation
error (blue) shown in the graph below.

Fig. 7. Performance of the ‘Road-marking Application and QA’ module

Fig. 8. CNN-based detection of old road markings: Test sample (a), Infer-
ence (b), Fitted trajectory (c). Spraying gun (tracking) offset estimation (d).

5) Automated Road-marking Application and QA: Once
the vehicle can track a trajectory, it will always exert some
level of tracking error. To cope with this, the lateral position
of the spraying gun can be controlled. The anticipated
tracking error is estimated using camera sensor C with
the sample detection frame shown in Fig. 8(d). Tracking
information is fed into the linear positioning system that will
reposition the spray gun position accordingly. Additionally,
the system can control the vertical linear position of the
spraying head, measure the length of both road markings
and gaps, and also trigger the spraying system on its own,
thus automating the whole process.

6) Other Modules: Besides the modules introduced so far,
there are other system speciﬁcs that are essential for the
successful operation of the vehicle. The presented system
has a number of safety features in place. The Safe Halt
mode not only makes sure that the vehicle will reach a
stand-still state safely, but will also trigger additional safety
measures to ﬂush the paint application system and keep
it safe. The system network supports both wireless and
cellular networks with the latencies measured around 100 ms.
Additionally, the connection between vehicle and operator
has been realized within a virtual private network (VPN) for
added communication security.

002040608010002000FrameWidth[mm]WidthestimateStandardtolerance0.10.0-0.1-0.2-0.3Difference[m/s]6.04.53.01.50.0Velocity[m/s]01000200030000100020003000GPS-RTKestimateOpticalFlowestimateFrameFrame(a)(b)(c)(d)C. System Performance and Future Work

REFERENCES

An experimental veriﬁcation took place on the premises
of the Gr¨un company in Siegen, Germany, with different
locations of the remote control center - from being at the
same test area in Siegen, up to a remote location approxi-
mately 500 kilometers away, in Munich. Tests have included
different driving scenarios, road marks, lighting and weather
conditions, and were carried out on a reduced scale, since
full-scale experimental veriﬁcation on actual construction
sites was beyond the scope of the project. Results have
shown that the introduced remote operation concept can be
used to teleoperate the road-marking machine in a way that
fully meets the given requirements. Implemented assistance
systems have demonstrated that they are able to provide
reliable and robust information also signiﬁcantly improving
upon the existing manual mode experience. Having a joystick
instead of a steering wheel for remote driving did not prove
to bring signiﬁcant beneﬁts apart from requiring less space,
however, this requires further veriﬁcation with more realistic
driving scenarios and longer operating sessions. Future work
should scale up the test activities to actual construction sites
and more relevant test scenarios. This would also include
ﬁne-tuning of the existing modules, and introduction of new
ones if needed to support new features such as shared lane
markings, etc. Additionally, studies should be designed and
conducted to assess the level of situational awareness and
mental load of the remote operator. This would also be used
to improve the overall control center design and further as-
sess means of physical interaction with the system. Finally, to
bring the vehicle closer to a market introduction, a systematic
safety assessment is required as well as consultations with
legislators and other relevant authorities prior to the ﬁnal
introduction of these vehicles to public roads.

IV. CONCLUSION

Driverless road maintenance could potentially be highly
beneﬁcial to all its stakeholders. This paper has demon-
strated how driverless technology might be deployed to road-
marking vehicles. Taking teleoperation technology as the
system base, the paper proposed a set of operating modes and
functionalities that can scale the operation of such vehicles
from plain remote driving to remote assistance and monitor-
ing where the human operator assists or merely monitors the
system. The concept was developed and successfully tested
with an actual experimental road-marking machine, creating
a baseline for future efforts in this and similar areas.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Domagoj Majstorovi´c as the ﬁrst author, was the main
developer of the presented work. Frank Diermeyer made es-
sential contributions to the conception of the research project
and revised the paper critically for important intellectual con-
tent. He gave ﬁnal approval for the version to be published
and agrees to all aspects of the work. As a guarantor, he
accepts responsibility for the overall integrity of the paper.
The authors want to thank their project partners, companies
Gr¨un, GmbH and TeaX, GmbH for their support, as well as,
students J. B¨omelburg-Zacharias, M. Mijaˇcevi´c, M. Peri´c and
Y. Xue. The research was funded by the Central Innovation
Program (ZIM) under grant No. ZF4648101MS8.

[1] Z. Huang, “Feasibility study of driverless maintenance in highway
construction zones,” Master’s thesis, Delft University of Technology,
2019.

[2] J. Wang, W. E. Hughes, Council, Forrest M., and J. F. Paniati,
“Investigation of highway work zone crashes: What we know and
what we don’t know,” Transp. Res. Rec., vol. 1529, no. 1, pp. 54–62,
1996.

[3] H. Yang, K. Ozbay, O. Ozturk, and K. Xie, “Work zone safety analysis
and modeling: a state-of-the-art review,” Trafﬁc Inj. Prev., vol. 16,
no. 4, pp. 387–396, 2015.

[4] ADB Independent Evaluation Department, “2013 annual evaluation
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/ﬁles/evaluation-document/

review,”
36102/ﬁles/2013-aer.pdf, 2013, accessed: 2022-5-8.

[5] Bakker, T. and Yaman, M., “Wegen vegen met een robot, kan dat?”
[Online].
https://web.archive.org/web/20070812133358/http://www.

GeoNieuws 2007-1, p.33-34, 2007, Technical Report.
Available:
geonieuws.nl/html/pdf/geo-2007-1/o-14-07-1.pdf

[6] JARI, “Operational Support System for Highway Tunnel Lights
Cleaning Vehicle,” 2013. [Online]. Available: https://www.jari.or.jp/
en/research-content/mobility/45933/

[7] T. Stolte, A. Reschka, G. Bagschik, and M. Maurer, “Towards
automated driving: Unmanned protective vehicle for highway hard
shoulder road works,” in 2015 IEEE 18th International Conference
on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 2015, pp. 672–677.

[8] G. Bagschik, A. Reschka, T. Stolte, and M. Maurer, “Identiﬁcation
of potential hazardous events for an unmanned protective vehicle,” in
2016 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV), 2016.

[9] T. Stolte, G. Bagschik, A. Reschka, and M. Maurer, “Hazard analysis
and risk assessment for an automated unmanned protective vehicle,” in
2017 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV), 2017, pp. 1848–1855.
[10] E.-N. Driveplaza, “Development of autonomous snow blowers using

the quasi-zenith satellite system,” 2021.

[11] STiM Company, “Road marking machine STiM kontur 700 TPK,”

2016.

[12] TinyMobileRobots,

“TinySurveyor TinyPreMarker

introduction,”

2019.

[13] WSDOT, “Work zone trafﬁc control guidelines for maintenance oper-

ations,” 2021.

[14] Federal Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (BAuA), “ASR
a5.2 anforderungen an arbeitspl¨atze und verkehrswege auf baustellen
im grenzbereich zum straßenverkehr - straßenbaustellen,” 2022.
[15] SAE J3016, “J3016 - Taxonomy and Deﬁnitions for Terms Related
to Driving Automation Systems for On-Road Motor Vehicles,”
Tech. Rep., 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.sae.org/standards/
content/j3016{ }202104

[16] Centre for Connected & Automated Vehicles, “Connected and au-
tomated vehicles - Vocabulary,” BSI Flex 1890 v4.0:2022-03, 2022,
Technical Report.

[17] Centre for Connected and Autonomous Vehicles, “Guidelines for
developing and assessing control systems for automated vehicles,” BSI
PAS 1880:2, 2020, Technical Report.

[18] D. Bogdoll, S. Orf, L. T¨ottel, and J. M. Z¨ollner, “Taxonomy and survey
on remote human input systems for driving automation systems,” in
Advances in Information and Communication, K. Arai, Ed. Cham:
Springer International Publishing, 2022, pp. 94–108.

[19] S. J. Anderson, S. B. Karumanchi, K. Iagnemma, and J. M. Walker,
“The intelligent copilot: A constraint-based approach to shared-
adaptive control of ground vehicles,” IEEE Intelligent Transportation
Systems Magazine, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 45–54, 2013.

[20] A. Schimpe and F. Diermeyer, “Steer with Me: A Predictive, Potential
Field-Based Control Approach for Semi-Autonomous, Teleoperated
Road Vehicles,” in 2020 IEEE 23rd International Conference on
Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC).

IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–6.

[21] B. Siciliano and O. Khatib, Springer Handbook of Robotics. Berlin,

Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2007.

[22] R. R. Murphy, Introduction to AI Robotics, 1st ed. Cambridge, MA,

USA: MIT Press, 2000.

[23] S. Gnatzig, F. Chucholowski, T. Tang, and M. Lienkamp, “A system
design for teleoperated road vehicles,” in Proceedings of the 10th
International Conference on Informatics in Control, Automation and
Robotics.
SciTePress - Science and and Technology Publications,
2013.

[24] A. Schimpe, J. Feiler, S. Hoffmann, D. Majstorovi´c, and F. Diermeyer,
“Open source software for teleoperated driving,” in 2022 International
Conference on Connected Vehicle and Expo (ICCVE), 2022, pp. 1–6.
[25] D. Majstorovi´c and F. Diermeyer, “ROAD: Road-marking assessment
dataset.” [Online]. Available: https://mediatum.ub.tum.de/1685449

