SURYA NAMASKAR: REAL-TIME ADVANCED YOGA POSE
RECOGNITION AND CORRECTION FOR SMART HEALTHCARE

A PREPRINT

Abhishek Sharma
ECE

Pranjal Sharma
CCE

Darshan Pincha
CCE

Prateek Jain
SENSE

The LNMIIT,India. The LNMIIT,India The LNMIIT,India VIT AP University,India

September 6, 2022

ABSTRACT

Nowadays, yoga has gained worldwide attention because of increasing levels of stress in the modern
way of life, and there are many ways or resources to learn yoga. The word yoga means a deep
connection between the mind and body. Today there is substantial Medical and scientific evidence to
show that the very fundamentals of the activity of our brain, our chemistry even our genetic content
can be changed by practicing different systems of yoga. Suryanamaskar, also known as salute to
the sun, is a yoga practice that combines eight different forms and 12 asanas(4 asana get repeated)
devoted to the Hindu Sun God, Surya. Suryanamaskar offers a number of health benefits such as
strengthening muscles and helping to control blood sugar levels. Here the Mediapipe Library is used
to analyze Surya namaskar situations. Standing is detected in real time with advanced software, as
one performs Surya namaskar in front of the camera. The class divider identifies the form as one of
the following: Pranamasana, Hasta Padasana,Hasta Uttanasana, Ashwa - Sanchalanasana, Ashtanga
Namaskar,Dandasana, or Bhujangasana and Svanasana. Deep learning-based techniques(CNN) are
used to develope this model with model accuracy of 98.68 percent and accuracy score of 0.75 to
detect correct yoga (Surya Namaskar ) posture. With this method, the users can practice the desired
pose and can check if the pose that the person is doing is correct or not. It will help in doing all
the different poses of surya namaskar correctly and increase the effeciency of the yoga practitioner.
This paper describes the whole framework which is to be implemented in the model.

1

Introduction

As with all exercises, it is very important to do Yoga or Surya Namaskar at a precise positioning as any unusual
position does not work and can tend to hurt the person. In the modern world we suggest having a Tutor around while
doing yoga.It does not always happen to have a Tutor or join yoga classes these days. So an AI-based program helps
in identifying Surya Namaskar conditions properly and provides feedback or suggestions to users. These instructions
help users improve their posture to be productive and Correct and not getting hurt by doing the wrong Posture .

So the challenges in this project are significant points should be earned without missing points too; models should work
well even where body parts overlap to each other. Suggestions should be given accurately from then on small changes
may result in harm. All Surya Namaskar Poses in the database used for this project are developed professionally.
Models should accurately distinguish the shape, however they are almost identical to the shape with little difference
in them. Automatic training methods for sports Activities it can help players improve their performance and slow
down injury risk. Many researchers have developed computer programs to test the effects of exercise . We proposed a
’Surya Namaskar’ pose Detection project using accelerated intensity features to make a difference in standing between
a student and specialist . Deep Pose has led to off-charge charging deep network-based strategies It retrieves directly
from shared links using deep neural network-based regressors. Expect human activities and predicts the location of
body parts.However, the approach is difficult to localize. In recent years, there have been activities related to yoga
pose discovery and categories. Ways to get key points used by OpenPose, PoseNet , and PifPaf . To find a person’s
shape, many features will be considered such as environment, human interaction, and diverse clothing . So for the
Surya Namaskar Pose Detection The in-depth learning methods which we have used to stand Classes are a multilayer

Figure 1: Surya Namaskar Poses

perceptron, Longshort-term memory (LSTM) , a repetitive neural network, and convolutional neural network(CNN)
. Limitations on the above functions that features (key points) are not rated and cannot detect a person’s pattern of
distances of different distances from the camera.

In this project we have estimated different poses in Surya namaskar using pose detection. In this project we have
used many no.of frames that is actually predicting what pose is being performed at that point in time,for example we
are performing bhujangasana it’s actually going to take the entire set of frames for that particular action to go and
determine what pose is being performed.The end goal is to produce real time yoga poses in Surya Namaskar pose
detection we have done this using python and build it step by step to be able to detect a bunch of different yoga poses
and specially Surya Namaskar ,in order to do that we have used few key models so we have used media pipe holistics
to extract key points so that had allowed us to extract different key point from diffrent parts of our body. We have used
tensor flow and keras and build a model to predict the different yoga poses which are shown on the screen .We have
taken Media Pipe holistics and take a trained LSTM model and actually predict the different yoga poses in real time.
So first we have collected a bunch of data on all of the different key points .We have collected data from different parts
of our body and we have saved those as numpy arrays and then we have trained a deep neural network using LSTM
layers and predict the temporal components. So we have predicted the action from a number of frames not just a single
frame then we have combined it all together using open CV and predicted it in real time using a webcam.

2 Surya Namaskar for Healthcare

Surya kriya or Surya namaskar is an effort to bring our system in syncronicity with rest of our solar system. It is called
Surya namkaskar mainly to activate solar plexus, to generate the heat in the solar system to raise samath parana or solar
heat in the system. Our spiritual health,your psychological health your spiritual possibility everything is determinde
by this.

Page – 2-of-11

Figure 2: Surya Namaskar Pose Classification

Figure 3: Benefits of Surya Namaskar on regular basis

Page – 3-of-11

3 Methodology

In order to perform Human Pose Detection using key points there are 11 steps that are followed

1. Import and install Dependencies: The first step is to import and install some dependencies, tensor flow 2.8
version ,open-cv, media pipe, sklearn, matplotlib libraries have been used. Open CV is a computer vision
library that allows to work with webcams and make it a little bit easier to build field. Open CV is used to
access webcam to extract key points and then media pipe holistics are used to actually extract key points.
Sklearn is used for evaluation Matrix as well as to leverage a training and testing split and then matplotlib is
used that helps to visualize images a little bit easier.

2. Key points using Media Pipe Holistics: In second step it is made sure that webcam could be accessed using
open CV and then secondary layer is applied where actual detections are made. Media pipe library is used
for setting a video capture and then gone to loop through every single frame and actually render that to the
screen.

3. Extract Key points Values: In Third step key point values were extracted. The key point values were
concatenated into numpy array and if the values at approximate time were not available then number zero
array was created.

4. Setup Folder for collection: In step four folders for array collection were set up, output as a result of going
through a data collection of these key points were collected. key points effectively form a Frame values.

5. Collect keypoint values for Training and Testing: In step 5 data has been collected , to collect the data,
mediapipe loop was started and then specifically snapshots were taken at each point in time. For each one of
the actions collection of the actions were taken through the set of frames per video.

6. Preprocess Data and create labels and features: In step 6 from sklearn library train test split has been
imported that helped in creating a training and testing partition.two category functions were imported from
keras that helped with labels.Trained tests split functions is used to partition the data into training partition
and in a testing partition.It helped to train one partition and test out on a different segment of data.In this step
a label array or label dictionary to represent each one of a diffrent pose was created.

7. Build and Train LSTM Neural Network: In 7 step neural network were trained for that tensorflow and

keras were used.

8. Make prediction: In 8 step predictions were made that were actually passed through a test data set.

9. Save weights: Model is saved for further use.

10. Evaluation using Confusion Matrix and Accuracy: In 10 step how the model is actually performing was
evaluated. For that couple of matrix from sklearn to evaluate the performance of the model has been imported.

11. Test in real time: The model was tested in real time in the final step.

4 DataSet

The proposed methodology is examined on a data set that is manually created by us. This data set includes 8 Surya
Namaskar poses, that is - Pranamasana, Hasta Uttanasana, Hasta Padasana, Dandasana, Ashwa - Sanchalanasana,
Ashtanga Namaskara,Bhujangasana and Svanasana.Total videos of the 8 poses were recorded inside a room with the
help of camera from a distance of some meters the frame per second rate is 60. To have trained models with good
accuracy, The videos were recorded from all angles( front , back and side )to get better results.

5 Component of Novelty in the Paper

Till today all the research work that has been done on the yoga pose classification classifies different yoga asanas .
This model tests surya namaskar pose in real-time which comprises of 12 steps performed in a specific series of 8
diffrent asanas. This model recognizes each of the 8 asanas. , recognition and grooming for human life. This real-time
frame-work is portrayed as a visual yoga teacher with a slight mistake in pose standing.

Page – 4-of-11

Figure 4: Methodology

Page – 5-of-11

6 Experimental Analysis and Results

This model predicts the Surya Namaskar poses sequence that is being performed by the user in real-time enviroment
and can examine the correctfullness of the poses. The Surya Namaskar pose classification system is evaluated with
the help of following criteria shown below as:

1. Classification Score: Classification scores usually indicate what model accuracy means. It can be described
as the ratio of the number of correct predictions to the total number of input samples. Accuracy is equal to
ratio of no. of predictions that are correct to total no. of predictions.

2. Confusion matrix: A confusion matrix is one that fully describes the accuracy of the model.

• you can use confusion matrix to calculate precision, recall, accuracy score, and other metrics. and use

that information to calculate precision and recall.

• Then use precision and recall to get fl-score t will be easier to show you how to calculate these things.

• you can calculate true negative, true positive, false negative, and false positive numbers,

Since the diagonal values represent correctly classified samples, we always want the diagonal of the matrix
to contain the maximum.

3. Model accuracy and model loss curve: Those curves are also referred to as learning curves and are by
and large used for fashions that analyze incrementally through the years, as an instance, neural networks.
They constitute the assessment on the education and validation information which gives us an idea of the
way properly the version is studying and how nicely is it generalizing. The model loss curve represents a
minimizing score (loss), which means that a decrease score outcomes in higher model overall performance.
Better rating denotes higher performance of the version. a terrific fitting version loss curve is one wherein
the education and validation loss lower and attain a factor of stability and feature minimal hole between the
very last loss values. then again, the fitted model accuracy curve is a curve this is stabilized with the aid of
increasing the schooling and validation accuracy , and there is a minimum gap between the very last accuracy
values.

Figure 5: Accuracy vs epoch

Generally as we increases the epochs the Accuracy increases but in some of cases the epochs has increased but the
accuracy decreases because of overfitting,exploding gradient and class imbalance problem sometimes the accuracy
decreases when increasing the epochs and as we see the Accuracy increases the loss decreases.

Page – 6-of-11

Figure 6: Epoch vs Loss

Figure 7: Model accuracy score

Figure 8: Predicted Output:Pranamasna

Figure 9: Predicted Output:Hasta Uttanasana

Page – 7-of-11

Figure 10: Predicted Output:Padahastasana

Figure 11: Predicted Output:Sanchalasana

Figure 12: Predicted Output:Svanasana

Page – 8-of-11

Figure 13: Predicted Output:Bhujangasana

Figure 14: Predicted Output:Ashtanga Namaskar

Table 1: Model Summary Table

Layer (Type)
lstm_13 (LSTM)
lstm_22 (LSTM)
lstm_14 (LSTM)
dense_12 (Dense)
dense_13 (Dense)
dense_14 (Dense)
Total params:
596,840

Output Shape
(None, 10, 64)
(None, 10, 128)
(None, 64)
(None, 64)
(None, 32)
(None, 8)
Trainable
params:
596,840

Parameters
442112
98816
49408
4160
2080
264
Non-trainable
params: 0

7 Conclusion ad Future Development

Estimation of human posture has been studied extensively in recent years. Estimating human posture differs from other
computer vision tasks in that it requires localizing and assembling parts of the human body based on an already defined
human body structure. Applying postural assessment to physical activities can help prevent injuries and increase the
effectiveness of people’s workouts. We propose that a yoga self-learning system can not only popularize yoga, but also
ensure that it is performed correctly. Deep learning methods are promising due to the extensive research being done
in this field. The use of hybrid CNN and LSTM models on OpenPose data is considered very effective and perfectly
classifies all eight yoga postures of Surya Namaskar. It is also possible to use native CNNs and SVMs, but SVMs do

Page – 9-of-11

not work with large datasets. This is less efficient than CNN + LSTM based models. Therefore, this project will help
people to perform Surya Namaskar posture accurately and effectively without a mentor.

8 References

1. Y. Agrawal, Y. Shah, and A. Sharma, “Implementation of Machine Learning Technique for Identification of Yoga
Poses,”IEEE 9th International Conference on Communication Systems and Network Technologies (CSNT). Apr. 2020.

2.Kothari, S. (n.d.). Yoga Pose Classification Using Deep Learning. San Jose State University Library.

3. M. Islam, H. Mahmud, F. Ashraf, I. Hossain and M. Hasan, "Yoga posture recognition by detecting human joint
points in real time using microsoft kinect", IEEE Region 10 Humanit. Tech. Conf., pp. 668-67, 2017.

4. Andriluka, M., Iqbal, U., Milan, A., Insafutdinov, E., Pishchulin, L., Gall, J.,Schiele, B.: Posetrack: A benchmark
for human pose estimation and tracking. In:Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition.pp. 5167–5176 (2018)

5.G. Ning, P. Liu, X. Fan and C. Zhan, “A top-down approach to articulated human pose estimation and tracking”,
ECCV Workshops, 2018.

6.U. Rafi, I.Kostrikov, J. Gall, and B. Leibe. An efficient convolutional network for human pose estimation.
BMVC,2016

In

7. M. Dantone, J. Gall, C. Leistner, “Human pose estimation using body parts dependent joint regressors”, Proc. IEEE
Conf. Computer Vision Pattern Recogn., 2013.

8. L. Sigal. “Human pose estimation”, Ency. of Comput. Vision, Springer 2011.

9.A. Kendall, M. Grimes, R. Cipolla, “PoseNet: a convolutional network for real-time 6- DOF camera relocalization”,
IEEE Intl. Conf. Computer Vision, 2015.

10. Garg, S., Saxena, A., & Gupta, R. (2022). Yoga pose classification: a CNN and MediaPipe inspired deep learning
approach for real-world application. In Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Humanized Computing. Springer Science
and Business Media LLC.

11.Thar, M. C., Winn, K. Z. N., & Funabiki, N. (2019). A Proposal of Yoga Pose Assessment Method Using Pose
Detection for Self-Learning. In 2019 International Conference on Advanced Information Technologies (ICAIT)IEEE.

12.Bhaumik, U., Chatterjee, S., & Kumar Singh, K. (2021). Suryanamaskar Pose Identification and Estimation Using
No Code Computer Vision. In Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering (pp. 85–90). Springer Singapore.

13.Chaudhari, A., Dalvi, O., Ramade, O., & Ambawade, D. (2021). Yog-Guru: Real-Time Yoga Pose Correction
System Using Deep Learning Methods.
In 2021 International Conference on Communication information and
Computing Technology (ICCICT) IEEE.

14.Haque, S., Rabby, A. S. A., Laboni, M. A., Neehal, N., & Hossain, S. A. (2019). ExNET: Deep Neural Network
for Exercise Pose Detection. In Communications in Computer and Information Science (pp. 186–193). Springer
Singapore.

15.Z. Cao, T. Simon, S. Wei, and Y. Sheikh, “OpenPose: realtime multi-person 2D pose estimation using part affinity
fields”, Proc. 30th IEEE Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recogn,2017.

16.U. Rafi, B. Leibe, J.Gall, and I. Kostrikov, “An efficient convolutional network for human pose estimation”, British
Mach. Vision Conf., 2016.

About the Authors

Abhishek Sharma is an Assistant Professor in Department of ECE, The LNMIIT, Jaipur, India. Contact him at
abhisheksharma@lnmiit.ac.in.

Pranjal Sharma is currently pursuing undergraduate in Communication and Computer Engineering from The
LNMIIT, Jaipur, India. Contact him at 19ucc144@lnmiit.ac.in

Darshan Pincha is currently pursuing undergraduate in Communication and Computer Engineering from The
LNMIIT, Jaipur, India. Contact him at 19ucc123@lnmiit.ac.in

Page – 10-of-11

Prateek Jain is currently Assistant Professor in SENSE from VIT AP University, India. Contact him at
prtk.ieju@gmail.com

Page – 11-of-11

