2
2
0
2

p
e
S
9

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
3
8
3
4
0
.
9
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Impacts and Integration of Remote-First Working
Environments

Christopher Atti∗, Cliff Cross∗, Ahmet Bugra Dogan∗,Christopher Hubbard ∗, Cameron Page ∗, Stephen
Montague ∗, Elnaz Rabieinejad†

∗College of Computing and Software Engineering,
Kennesaw State University, Marietta, GA USA
catti@students.kennesaw.edu, ccross6@students.kennesaw.edu, adogan2@students.kennesaw.edu,
chubba29@students.kennesaw.edu, smontagu@students.kennesaw.edu,
†Cyber Science Lab, School of Computer Science, University of Guelph, Ontario, Canada
erabiein@uoguelph.ca

Abstract—Due to the Covid-19 pandemic in 2020 or other business decisions, remote work is becoming increasingly popular. “Remote
ﬁrst” working environments exist within companies where most employees work remotely. This paper takes a deep dive into the
remote-ﬁrst mentality. It investigates its effects on employees at varying stages in their careers, day-to-day productivity, and working
relationships with team members. We found that the remote-ﬁrst mentality most impacts seasoned employees and managers,
potentially due to trouble adjusting to a new way of working compared to the rest of their careers and the “always on” mentality
associated with working from home. Regarding productivity, we found that while software development productivity appears
unimpacted, the effectiveness of communication and employee wellbeing saw declines which are generally associated with lowered
productivity. Finally, we looked closer at the communication side of things and how remote work impacts relationship building. We found
that the most signiﬁcant impacts on relationship building centered around “trust” and “credibility” being harder to build due to a lack of
non-verbal cues during social interactions.

Index Terms—Remote-ﬁrst, Work from home, Virtual relationship building, Remote communication, Covid-19 impacts, Challenges of
remote work, Remote work productivity, Virtual collaboration.

✦

1 INTRODUCTION

In today’s world, many companies face the dilemma of
allowing or becoming a remote-ﬁrst work environment.
Companies have allowed people to work from home for
quite some time now. Most likely, it was one, maybe two,
days a week. Therefore, “work from home” is not exactly a
new phenomenon. On the other hand, one could argue that
working in an ofﬁce is the new ideology [1], [2]. According
to WeWorkRemotely.com, “Before the Industrial Revolution,
everyone worked out of their homes [3]. Skilled blacksmiths,
carpenters, leather workers, and potters each set up shop
at their residence and sold their goods from there.” The
Industrial Revolution was when big machines and the need
to mass-produce forced people to go into warehouse-type
buildings where they could work in such fashion. Of course,
some still require large machinery and mass production,
but most desk jobs do not require employees to be in a
centralized building to get their work done productively. In
fact, “’43 percent of employed Americans said they spent
at least some time working remotely’ according to one
Gallup study” [3]. The article posted this quote was written
in 2017, long before COVID-19 forced every non-essential
worker to work remotely [4]. Then, companies had to adapt
quickly to having almost all their employees in remote
positions, which has become a revolution. However, as we

head towards a light at the end of the tunnel regarding the
pandemic that forced millions of people to work remotely,
companies require their employees to return to the ofﬁce at
total capacity. A new term is being coined in response to
employees who are being forced back into the ofﬁce. It is
known as “The Great Resignation.” According to Forbes,
“Dubbed ‘The Great Resignation,’ workplaces are seeing
a trend in employees quitting their jobs. A record four
million workers called it quits in April alone, according
to the Labor Department. Pandemic burnout, a collective
reassessment about priorities and what matters most, a
labor shortage and more companies calling workers back
into the ofﬁce maybe some of the reasons behind this trend”
[5]. A direct result of people being asked to return to the
ofﬁce is causing “a record four million workers” to quit their
jobs in search of something that allows for more ﬂexibility
[6]. Now, people want to work from home or have the
ﬂexibility to choose a remote-ﬁrst environment, but is that
the best-case scenario for all employees or companies? In
this paper, ﬁrstly, we look to determine the effects remote-
ﬁrst work has on employees at different career stages. Then,
we discuss an employee’s productivity level in the ofﬁce
versus at home and the process and difﬁculty it takes in
getting a remote-ﬁrst team to gel and work together well.
Finally, we examine the beneﬁt of Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI)
in the remote working environment.

 
 
 
 
 
 
2 CHALLENGES OF REMOTE WORK AT
VARYING CAREER STAGES

2.1 Seasoned Versus New Employees

While working remotely, many employees face new chal-
lenges that you may not be subject to in an ofﬁce setting [7],
[8]. In recent years, seasoned employees have adjusted to
becoming fully remote while newer employees most likely
have been hired on for a start to work full remote; both
have their challenges. Seasoned employees could have a
more challenging time adjusting to working from home [9].
Real-world distractions around them that they did not have
before, such as housework, pets, tv, family, and outside
noise, could all play a part in entirely focusing on the
job. This is because this is a newer problem that these
workers face. Some remote employees ﬁnd it helpful to have
a dedicated home ofﬁce where they go to do work. This
can help those feeling like they never get away from work
getaway. Once they leave their ofﬁce, they leave work there.
Seasoned employees that have been used to going to the
ofﬁce sometimes can have difﬁculty adjusting to working
remotely. The transition from the ofﬁce environment where
they have gotten used to interactions daily with people can
also be challenging [10]. While working remotely, many
of the day-to-day interactions will be conducted virtually.
Some remote employees also feel distanced from their team
because they do not see them in person. If available, these
employees may enjoy a hybrid style work environment
where they can work in the ofﬁce one or two days a week.
On the ﬂip side, newly hired employees were most likely
already engaged to be remote or have a hybrid role at home
and in the ofﬁce. However, these new employees may not
understand the company rules and standards needed to do
the job. According to [10], One of the biggest challenges
would most likely fall under communication issues. While
working remotely, one has to be very connected to those
they work with, especially if they have a team-oriented role.
Being dialed into what one’s team is doing is essential for
completing tasks correctly. Sometimes not having a direct
face-to-face interaction about a project can limit one’s un-
derstanding of what it takes to complete and not ask the
right questions to get the correct answers [11]. That could
mean going back and forth to ﬁx mistakes along the way.

2.2 Seasoned Versus New Employees

Managers face different types of challenges when it comes to
their employees. One thing that must be done by managers
that have remote teams is to make sure they are commu-
nicating consistently with them about projects and what
is expected of them [12]. In addition, managers must keep
their experienced employees in the loop of expectations. If
their employees are experienced, there will be less concern
about getting their job done than losing productivity or
having other distractions happen [13], [14]. Managers tend
to have an “always on” approach to work, especially while
being remote. After hours, remote workers may answer
emails or calls more than if one left the ofﬁce and went
home. That feeling of not disconnecting can be a challenge
for many managers because they feel they can get more
completed or try to answer that last email or ﬁnish up that

previous request [15]. However, disconnecting can be very
important to unwind and keep that work and life balance
separate.

2

3 EMPLOYEE PRODUCTIVITY IN OFFICE
AND REMOTE

3.1 Measures of Remote Work Productivity

Productivity can be measured by different metrics, both
quantitative and qualitative. Typical measurements are de-
ployment frequency, review to merge time, TLOC, etc. The
degree to which a remote employee is productive is more
scrutinized than employees in the ofﬁce and more reliant
on complex data. Observing an in-ofﬁce employee toiling
away can lend more credence to visible productivity versus
seeing an “online” status indicator. As noted by “Darja,
Anastasiia, Nils, Eﬁ, Eriks, and Marte, cited from Smite,
Russo, and Bezerra. “The analysis of all GitHub projects
(open source and corporate) concludes that the developer
activity in terms of the number of pushes, pull requests,
code reviews, and commented issues remained similar or
slightly increased compared to the pre-pandemic year. This
ﬁnding is consonant with numerous other studies that
conclude that software companies have nothing to worry
about since working from home is per se not a signiﬁcant
challenge for software engineers” [16]. They express how
the value of activity metrics cannot answer questions re-
garding factors such as how to measure periods of inactivity
between actions and engagement and concentration periods
[17], [18].

3.2 Reported Productivity

Self-reported productivity among engineers who work from
home differs based on personal preference and everyone’s
barriers and drivers. Darja, Anastasiia, nils, Eﬁ, Eriks, and
Marte, analyze six corporate surveys conducted in four
Scandinavian companies to uncover “emotional issues” and
factors stemming from perceived isolation and communi-
cation style/preference are barriers for those employees
who report decreased productivity. Better work-life balance,
“ﬂexibility and planning the work hours,” and the removal
of commuting and pop-up conversations were among the
most prevalent reported beneﬁts, and drivers of working
from home [16]. The above group explained how personal
biases could further skew the reliability of remote work sur-
vey data from a top-down organizational level to individual
reﬂections.

3.3 Productivity in an Agile Environment

Issues in standard work methodologies like Scrum become
compounded when workers are remote. Mak and Krutchen
study the problems with productivity via task coordination.
”Agile techniques such as features or story cards tend not
to adapt very well [19]”. The impact of Techniques that
utilize physical presence, such as ”Dot Voting” and ”Fist
of Five,” are minimized. The names of these activities,
ex. ”StandUp” becomes more labels than actions, but the
scrum guide does not explicitly state that a team must be
positioned in the same place. Along with difﬁculties in

team dynamics, there is the perception that trust suffers
under a distributed agile team. In establishing an empir-
ically developed framework for building trust in remote
agile teams: Tyagi, Sibal, and Suri report, ”Trust is one
of the key factors that inﬂuences team performance and
acts as a foundation for effective teamwork” in agile teams
[20]. The authors conceive a framework that assists and
supports agile teams that can beneﬁt from trust-building
techniques and exercises. Communication challenges can
become the bottleneck of an effective agile environment in
remote development environments. Bundhun and Roopesh
create a communication framework to address productivity
attributes such as” differences in geographical locations
and trust and cultural issues between team members and
poor coordination and communication,” as observed by
a Mauritian-based software company [21]. In leveraging
agreed-upon communication standards, these authors could
provide a framework and survey results to accomplish
adaptable guidelines.

3.4 Employee Wellbeing Related to Productivity

It is generally accepted that higher well-being is related to
a more performant employee. However, general well-being
can be attributed to many variables, including timeline pres-
sures, work-from-home conﬂicts, and work-family conﬂicts.
This is demonstrated by Darouei and Pluut, who surveyed
34 professional workers to test their ﬁve hypotheses.
”Hypothesis 1. Working from home (compared with the of-
ﬁce) will be negatively associated with work-family conﬂict.
Hypothesis 2. Within individuals, time pressure mediates
the negative relationship between working from home and
work-family conﬂict experienced at home.
Hypothesis 3. Within individuals, work-family conﬂict ex-
perienced at home in the evening is positively related to
emotional exhaustion the next morning.
Hypothesis 4. Within individuals, work-family conﬂict ex-
perienced at home in the evening is negatively related to
work engagement the next morning.
Hypothesis 5a. Within individuals, work-family conﬂict ex-
perienced at home in the evening is positively related to
negatively affecting the organization the next morning.
Hypothesis 5b. Within individuals, work-family conﬂict
experienced at home in the evening is negatively related
to positive affect towards the organization the next morn-
ing”. The research survey results generally supported the
hypotheses presented, with either a negative or positive
outcome affecting performance directly [22].

4 DIFFICULTIES IN TEAMWORK

Semi-related to productivity is a team’s ability to “gel” and
foster healthy personal and working relationships [23]. Of
course, many factors go into team dynamics and working
relationships. However, for the sake of analysis and keeping
separate from the “productivity” discussion, we can narrow
this down to the ability to get to know your team and
perform collaborative software development within a given
toolset.

3

4.1 Difﬁculties in Getting to Know Your Team

As Wojahn, Taylor, and Blicharz identiﬁed, remote-ﬁrst em-
ployees, interact with colleagues from all over the country
and the globe. They do this using a combination of voice,
text, and video communication, with the primary means
of communication being text or voice only. This leads to
complications when attempting to gauge others’ reactions
to us due to the lack of visual clues such as body lan-
guage, facial expressions, and other non-verbal clues. Even
more difﬁcult than maintaining existing relationships and
communication with colleagues when a new team comes
together remotely and meets each other for the ﬁrst time
[24]). The complications with non-visual communication are
exacerbated when team members have no prior history of
working experience together. In their paper, Moster, Ford,
and Rodeghero identify that trust-building is one of the
most challenging parts of remote work. Communication
is vital for building trust, and “communication for virtual
teams is often less frequent than in-person teams.” To
combat complications due to inconsistent communication
and lack of initial faith, ad-hoc personal conversations and
video conferencing early in team formation can lessen the
impact of virtual teamwork [25]. In a remote-ﬁrst environ-
ment, the primary means of communication will be digital,
whether email, instant message, voice/video chat, or some
other form of virtual communication that is not in-person
[26]. According to Yang, the previously mentioned com-
munication mediums fall under the “computer mediated
communication” category and are supported by many tools
to help facilitate relationship building [27]. Trust is difﬁcult
to build virtually, but “moreover, when all social interac-
tions are mediated by technology, people’s impressions and
perception of each other can be affected by the mediated
social cues transmitted by different media. For example,
the proﬁle images people use, the description of one’s self-
introduction, and visible online activities can inﬂuence how
people perceive one another and their willingness to form
further relationships to various extents.” He conducted mul-
tiple experiments involving virtual interactions and found
that the lack of non-verbal cues can impact relationships
with team members. However, poorly chosen ambient cues
also add a factor to non-verbal cues. Virtual backgrounds or
avatars deemed “unprofessional” were found to impact per-
ceptions of interactions and employee credibility negatively
[28].

4.2 Difﬁculties in Collaborative Software Development

The most critical factor in remote-ﬁrst work is communi-
cation, but communication alone will not solve all collab-
oration issues. Gupta and Fernandez group collaboration
in software engineering into four categories: model-based
collaboration to reduce ambiguity and increase error detec-
tion, process-centric tools to help deﬁne and facilitate the
software process, awareness tools to enable team members
to be easier informed of changes to help avoid conﬂicts
and infrastructure tools which assist in improving interoper-
ability by streamlining data and control integration. Notice
the heavy emphasis on tools. Due to the sheer volume of
available tools, there is no shortage of options. However,
Gupta and Fernandez also found through experience that

“the choices of how to collaborate is usually an ad hoc
decision based on current practices, the available collabora-
tion mechanisms and sometimes, client-related constraints.
Their investigations reveal few examples in which software
teams have planned a collaboration strategy based on con-
scious analysis of collaboration needs, constraints in the
project, tools availability, etc.” This lack of emphasis on
tool analysis before beginning projects can heavily impact
productivity and lead to frustration and a decline in morale
[29]. The open-source software development space is one
place to look for difﬁculties in software collaboration and
how to combat them. Braunschweig and Seaman took an in-
depth look at open-source software. They determined that
developers must have a shared understanding of the goals
and plans of the project to avoid complications and mis-
understandings. To evaluate increasing shared knowledge,
they attempted to quantify four attributes of communica-
tion: Synchrony, Proximity, Proportionality, and Maturity.
They found that highly mature contact was typically asso-
ciated with “a high degree of structure and standardiza-
tion. Standards, tools, explicit rules, and mentoring of new
developers help ensure that work is performed following
consistent processes, without much ongoing discussion of
those processes.” This ﬁnding also supported their other
results, indicating that having standard processes and tools
helps all aspects of communication and remote software
development [30]. Reaching this maturity is the tricky part
and is impacted by the factors previously discussed, such
as team trust, team dynamic. The ability to select a proper
toolset and standards for the team [31].

5 THE ROLE OF AI IN SHIFTING COMPANIES TO
REMOTE WORKING

As mentioned earlier, in the new era, they are moving
towards working remotely, while this method has many
challenges that must be taken into account. With the ad-
vancement of information and communication technology,
new technologies such as AI can play a complementary role
in remote working and reduce existing challenges [32]. AI
leads processes in a company to be more intelligent and
more automatic [33] and, in this way, can assist remote
working by improving efﬁciency [34]. In the following, we
will review some applications of AI in remote ﬁrst com-
panies. In a remote-ﬁrst company, meetings are an essential
part of work. These meetings can be between employees of a
team with customers, employees of a team with each other,
and also with other teams of the company. During these
meetings, critical information is exchanged. So, meetings
should be high-quality in terms of sound, resolution, etc., so
employees can provide and receive important information.
The settings of meeting software may be very frustrating
for IT leaders. If something goes wrong in the setting, the
meeting should be disrupted to set them again, which is
time-consuming. Recently, AI-driven software can assist IT
leaders in their job by setting light, resolution, sound, giving
access to the right member, etc. [35]. In addition, during
the meeting, AI can collect and transfer information auto-
matically [36]. Another critical challenge in remote work-
ing is communicating across teams at different levels and
following up with them [37]. In an AI-driven application,

4

employees can enter their requests into an AI bot, and the
AI bot can communicate with the right person and ask
for their task status [38]. This can be time-consuming and
confusing without AI. Moreover, in remote work, employees
usually struggle with many technical problems, and because
they don’t access a rapid IT expert, they have to solve
these problems by themselves. In this ﬁeld, AI can play
a useful role. Companies usually use AI-driven agents for
online troubleshooting. In this way, when remote employees
have a technical problem, contact an AI bot and enter their
problem. The AI bot provides suggestions, and a step-by-
step solution to the problem [39]. These examples show that
AI offers different remote working services and can help
companies to bridge the gap of remote working.

6 CONCLUSION
The remote-ﬁrst working environment is still an open dis-
cussion. Since we have the human factor involved in the
discussion, it is almost impossible to say whether remote-
ﬁrst is the best idea. As we mentioned in section III, ev-
ery individual has their preferences, which is one of the
biggest reasons this discussion is open. The remote-ﬁrst
work environment has positive and negative sides, no mat-
ter how experienced or seasoned employees are. In terms
of productivity, on the other hand, based on the number of
pushes, pull requests, code reviews, and commented issues
on remote repositories made by software engineers, they
kept their pace in a remote environment compared to the
ofﬁce, which proves us well organized remote teams can still
be as productive as they were on-site. [8] While the article
explains productivity through GitHub pushes, pull requests,
and other measurements, there are many other factors to
look at when it comes to productivity. Based on the ﬁndings
in this paper, overall productivity has declined due to the
struggles associated with working with a remote team. One
of the biggest challenges in remote-ﬁrst work environments
is harmony within the remote team. The inﬂuential factors
which make it challenging are team trust and dynamics. As
natural behavior of us human beings, we tend not to trust
people we just met at the beginning. Based on the nature of
humans, this process becomes even more challenging when
people/teams have their ﬁrst meeting via online platforms
where they cannot see each other’s facial impressions or
read their body language as clearly as they do in physical
meetings. Choosing the proper toolset to improve commu-
nication and collaboration within the team companies can
ease this challenge.

REFERENCES

[1] A. Yazdinejad, A. Dehghantanha, R. M. Parizi, M. Hammoudeh,
H. Karimipour, and G. Srivastava, “Block hunter: Federated learn-
ing for cyber threat hunting in blockchain-based iiot networks,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.09829, 2022.

[2] E. Rabieinejad, A. Yazdinejad, and R. M. Parizi, “A deep learning
model for threat hunting in ethereum blockchain,” in 2021 IEEE
20th International Conference on Trust, Security and Privacy in Com-
puting and Communications (TrustCom).
IEEE, 2021, pp. 1185–1190.
[3] N. Chokshi, “Out of the ofﬁce: More people are working remotely,

survey ﬁnds,” The New York Times, vol. 15, p. B4, 2017.

[4] E. Rabieinejad, A. Yazdinejad, T. Hasani, and M. Hammoudeh,
“Blockchain-based e-commerce for the covid-19 economic crisis,”
in The 5th International Conference on Future Networks & Distributed
Systems, 2021, pp. 105–112.

5

communication,” in 2021 IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference
on Software Engineering: Software Engineering Education and Training
(ICSE-SEET).

IEEE, 2021, pp. 89–94.

[26] A. Yazdinejad, R. M. Parizi, A. Dehghantanha, and K.-K. R. Choo,
“Blockchain-enabled authentication handover with efﬁcient pri-
vacy protection in sdn-based 5g networks,” IEEE Transactions on
Network Science and Engineering, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 1120–1132, 2019.
[27] A. Yazdinejad, R. M. Parizi, A. Dehghantanha, H. Karimipour,
G. Srivastava, and M. Aledhari, “Enabling drones in the internet
of things with decentralized blockchain-based security,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 6406–6415, 2020.

[28] C.-L. Yang, “Understanding and reducing perception gaps with
mediated social cues when building workplace relationships
through cmc,” in Companion Publication of the 2021 Conference on
Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing, 2021,
pp. 303–306.

[29] M. Gupta and J. Fernandez, “How globally distributed software
teams can improve their collaboration effectiveness?” in 2011 IEEE
Sixth International Conference on Global Software Engineering.
IEEE,
2011, pp. 185–189.

[30] B. Braunschweig and C. Seaman, “An examination of shared
understanding in free/libre open source project maintenance,” in
2013 6th International Workshop on Cooperative and Human Aspects of
Software Engineering (CHASE).

IEEE, 2013, pp. 113–116.

[31] A. Yazdinejad, R. M. Parizi, A. Bohlooli, A. Dehghantanha, and
K.-K. R. Choo, “A high-performance framework for a network
programmable packet processor using p4 and fpga,” Journal of
Network and Computer Applications, vol. 156, p. 102564, 2020.
[32] M. H. Jarrahi, “Artiﬁcial intelligence and the future of work:
Human-ai symbiosis in organizational decision making,” Business
horizons, vol. 61, no. 4, pp. 577–586, 2018.

[33] A. Yazdinejad, E. Rabieinejad, A. Dehghantanha, R. M. Parizi, and
G. Srivastava, “A machine learning-based sdn controller frame-
work for drone management,” in 2021 IEEE Globecom Workshops
(GC Wkshps).

IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–6.

[34] T. Miller, AI and Remote Working: A Paradigm Shift in Employment.

Business Expert Press, 2021.

[35] S. Samrose, D. McDuff, R. Sim, J. Suh, K. Rowan, J. Hernandez,
S. Rintel, K. Moynihan, and M. Czerwinski, “Meetingcoach: An
intelligent dashboard for supporting effective & inclusive meet-
ings,” in Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, 2021, pp. 1–13.

[36] C. L. Curchoe, “Meetings that matter: time to put artiﬁcial intel-
ligence on the art roadmap,” Journal of Assisted Reproduction and
Genetics, pp. 1–4, 2022.

[37] D. S. Staples, “A study of remote workers and their differences
from non-remote workers,” Journal of Organizational and End User
Computing (JOEUC), vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 3–14, 2001.

[38] A. Dave,

“How to

successful

enable
Apr

remote work
Available:

strategy with
https://cloudtweaks.com/2022/04/how-enable-successful-remote-work-strategy-ai/

[Online].

2022.

ai,”

[39] M.

Oliver,

mote
https://itchronicles.com/artiﬁcial-intelligence/the-role-of-ai-in-remote-work/

work,”

“The
Feb

role
2022.

of

ai
[Online].

in
re-
Available:

[5] H. Corbett, “The great resignation: Why employees don’t want to

go back to the ofﬁce,” Forbes, 2021.

[6] A. Yazdinejad, A. Dehghantanha, H. Karimipour, G. Srivastava,
and R. M. Parizi, “An efﬁcient packet parser architecture for
software-deﬁned 5g networks,” Physical Communication, vol. 53,
p. 101677, 2022.

[7] R. M. Parizi, S. Homayoun, A. Yazdinejad, A. Dehghantanha, and
K.-K. R. Choo, “Integrating privacy enhancing techniques into
blockchains using sidechains,” in 2019 IEEE Canadian Conference
of Electrical and Computer Engineering (CCECE).
IEEE, 2019, pp.
1–4.

[8] A. Yazdinejad, R. M. Parizi, A. Dehghantanha, Q. Zhang, and K.-
K. R. Choo, “An energy-efﬁcient sdn controller architecture for
iot networks with blockchain-based security,” IEEE Transactions on
Services Computing, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 625–638, 2020.

[9] R. Dhar, “Work from home during covid-19 lockdown: A gender

perspective.”

[10] H. Sahour, K. M. Kemink, and J. O’Connell, “Integrating sar
and optical remote sensing for conservation-targeted wetlands
mapping,” Remote Sensing, vol. 14, no. 1, p. 159, 2021.

[11] S. J. Cooke, W. M. Twardek, A. J. Lynch, I. G. Cowx, J. D. Olden,
S. Funge-Smith, K. Lorenzen, R. Arlinghaus, Y. Chen, O. L. Weyl
et al., “A global perspective on the inﬂuence of the covid-19
pandemic on freshwater ﬁsh biodiversity,” Biological Conservation,
vol. 253, p. 108932, 2021.

[12] M. Zeuch, Dos and Don’ts in Human Resources Management: A

Practical Guide. Springer, 2014.

[13] A. Yazdinejad, R. M. Parizi, A. Dehghantanha, and H. Karimipour,
“Federated learning for drone authentication,” Ad Hoc Networks,
vol. 120, p. 102574, 2021.

[14] A. Yazdinejad, A. Bohlooli, and K. Jamshidi, “Efﬁcient design and
hardware implementation of the openﬂow v1. 3 switch on the
virtex-6 fpga ml605,” The Journal of Supercomputing, vol. 74, no. 3,
pp. 1299–1320, 2018.

[15] S. Sreenath and R. G. Shetty, “Fortifying talent management &
sustainability–an outlook for the future,” Asia Paciﬁc Journal of
Research, p. 371.

[16] D. Smite, A. Tkalich, N. B. Moe, E. Papatheocharous, E. Klotins,
and M. P. Buvik, “Changes in perceived productivity of software
engineers during covid-19 pandemic: The voice of evidence,”
Journal of Systems and Software, vol. 186, p. 111197, 2022.

[17] A. Yazdinejad, R. M. Parizi, A. Dehghantanha, G. Srivastava,
S. Mohan, and A. M. Rababah, “Cost optimization of secure
routing with untrusted devices in software deﬁned networking,”
Journal of Parallel and distributed Computing, vol. 143, pp. 36–46,
2020.

[18] A. Yazdinejad, A. Bohlooli, and K. Jamshidi, “P4 to sdnet: Au-
tomatic generation of an efﬁcient protocol-independent packet
parser on reconﬁgurable hardware,” in 2018 8th International Con-
ference on Computer and Knowledge Engineering (ICCKE).
IEEE,
2018, pp. 159–164.

[19] D. K. Mak and P. B. Kruchten, “Task coordination in an agile
distributed software development environment,” in 2006 Canadian
conference on electrical and computer engineering.
IEEE, 2006, pp.
606–611.

[20] S. Tyagi, R. Sibal, and B. Suri, “Empirically developed framework
for building trust in distributed agile teams,” Information and
Software Technology, vol. 145, p. 106828, 2022.

[21] K. Bundhun and R. K. Sungkur, “Developing a framework to
overcome communication challenges in agile distributed teams–
case study of a mauritian-based it service delivery centre,” Global
Transitions Proceedings, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 315–322, 2021.

[22] M. Darouei and H. Pluut, “Work from home today for a better
tomorrow! how working from home inﬂuences work-family con-
ﬂict and employees’ start of the next workday,” Stress and Health,
vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 986–999, 2021.

[23] A. Yazdinejad, G. Srivastava, R. M. Parizi, A. Dehghantanha, K.-
K. R. Choo, and M. Aledhari, “Decentralized authentication of
distributed patients in hospital networks using blockchain,” IEEE
journal of biomedical and health informatics, vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 2146–
2156, 2020.

[24] P. Wojahn, S. K. Taylor, and K. Blicharz, “Forming groups into
teams through virtual interactions: Researching remote collabo-
rators and “getting to know you”,” in 2010 IEEE International
Professional Comunication Conference.

IEEE, 2010, pp. 203–209.

[25] M. Moster, D. Ford, and P. Rodeghero, “” is my mic on?” prepar-
ing se students for collaborative remote work and hybrid team

This figure "ThreatHunting.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/2209.04383v1

This figure "lifecycle.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/2209.04383v1

This figure "r1.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/2209.04383v1

